Introduction to Decentralization 1
Introduction to Decentralization
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
This is an introduction to decentralization. The authors distinguish centralized from
decentralized organizations and show their respective uses and limitations in differ-
ent contexts.
A centralized hierarchy is the most efficient architecture for solving the particular
limited problem it was designed to address. But centralization is not the optimal or-
ganizational structure under highly dynamic conditions. Rigid power allocation
means the organization can’t easily reorganize to adapt to unanticipated challenges
from the outside. Clear rules lead to internal corruption when the letter of the law
overrides the spirit of the law and members compete for power. New sources of in-
formation are ignored since they don’t have existing lines to the decision-making au-
thorities. Information at the edge is lost.
The authors show that advances in technology have given decentralized systems the
efficiency they have lacked in previous eras and that allowed them to be outcom-
peted by centralized systems. Decentralized organizations thrive under the types of
changing circumstances that break centralized organizations. Information at the
edge is naturally incorporated and communicated so the system can adapt to exter-
nal threats. Decentralized organizations are more stable. Decentralized organizations
do not crash in response to new external problems like crystalline hierarchies do. De-
centralizing allows an organization to adapt to change and chaos. Decentralization,
while it may be seen as wastefully redundant, gives every member greater autono-
mous power.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

2 (cid:0) Overview and Introduction
Overview & Introduction
The process of organizational development
Human group coordination naturally progresses from the first stage, chaos (barbari-
ans ravaging the landscape, “Raahr!”), to decentralized organization (“Let’s all agree
to band together to defend ourselves from the barbarians”), to centralized organiza-
tion (“Long live the king”).
Abstractly, the first stage is chaos, completely disorganized individualized power cen-
ters, or nodes in the network. We imagine chaos as random uncoordinated actions,
the first moments after the Big Bang, the static of your television screen flooded
with turbulent Brownian motion.
These individualized power centers proceed to decentralized organization when the
powers become more correlated, aligned by a common principle, a transcendental
goal, an ideal. The individuals may begin to partially imitate each other as they seek
to progress toward this common goal. The individual nodes remain autonomous; the
network does not have fixed roles for each member. But they are all responding to a
higher calling as they unite in purpose. This newfound harmony makes the group
more efficient than before, as they find varying ways to collaborate in more complex
cooperative behaviors. “The values are the organization.”
The final stage is a centralized hierarchy. The harmony and cooperation of the de-
centralized organization filters the group into an ever tighter and more complex hier-
archical structure, raising some individuals into positions of power over others. If
successfully completed, a tree structure emerges, a hierarchy, and the organization
becomes fully centralized with a single member on top. This filtering process is usu-
ally the result of competition. Money is especially efficient in focusing the competi-
tion. Rarely, instead, a hierarchy may form from the conscious allocation of power,
matching the position to the appropriate individual’s talents.
If the hierarchy is successfully completed, all individuals find their positions of power
statically fixed and the levers of power clear. Each member has a very limited num-
ber of formal connections to the other members of the centralized organization, in-
stead of interacting on a relatively equal basis with all other members like they did
when it was decentralized. This end stage is a completely centralized organization,
with the top of the hierarchy (or the root of the tree) being the center of power.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

Overview and Introduction (cid:0) 3
Until there is a single central power at the top of the hierarchy, there is still room for
more efficiency, and the organization is incomplete and in flux. Ideally, once a single
central power emerges, the organization is optimally efficient and effective in ad-
dressing the challenge it was formed under. A centralized organization can rapidly
change course, following the single leader at the head of the chain of command. As-
sumedly, the very best decision maker is the leader who has the power to move eve-
ryone in the organization in unison to respond to those difficulties.
What comes after the hierarchy is complete? If the hierarchy is too rigid, the organi-
zation inevitably fails, and the result is a return to chaos. That’s why it’s called a rev-
olution—because governmental structures have followed this cyclic pattern through-
out history. The written traditions of every civilized culture include stories of how
the rigid hierarchy rises from chaos, but inevitably shatters and falls back to the cha-
otic void.
The threats to a centralized organization can be both external or internal. External
challenges that can destroy a centralized organization are novel and unexpected
changes. Internally, a centralized organization can fail from corruption or friction,
from ineptitude at the top or from the discontent of those at the bottom.
The organizational clarity of a centralized hierarchy makes it extremely efficient at
the task for which it was originally constituted. However, any new outside challenge
to the group may reveal the weakness of the structure. Tree structures of a central-
ized organization are optimally efficient for communicating orders from a single
member. However, if too much power is held in any single office in the hierarchy, de-
cision making finds a bottleneck that can cripple the organization. A strongly central-
ized organization leaves no power of decision making in the outer edges of the or-
ganization. “Information at the edge” is not likely to make its way from the bottom
echelon (the leaves of the tree) to the highest echelon of power (the trunk of the
tree). The central authority makes decisions without full information, so a central-
ized organization is not well designed to respond to any crisis it hasn’t anticipated. If
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

4 (cid:0) Overview and Introduction
the power structure is particularly crystalline and cannot bend and rearrange its or-
der, it cannot survive the inevitable novel challenges that arise in time when it faces
a new organization that has been better formed in the crucible of the novel chal-
lenge.
The internal threat to an organization is friction. Friction is simply the inefficient allo-
cation of power, which is an ever-present feature in any hierarchy. By inefficient allo-
cation of power, we mean that if the distribution of power were changed, the goals
of the organization could be achieved more easily. Left unchecked, friction can grind
a centralized system to a halt. Typical sources of friction are communication bottle-
necks, corruption, and concentration of power.
The most common type of friction comes from the natural tendency of a hierarchy to
concentrate power at the top. The basic mechanism is “the rich get richer”. A more
powerful member is able to use their greater power to gain more power, in any
stage, than a weaker member can. Any differentiation between members tends to
separate them further as time goes on. This is why hierarchies tend to become cen-
tralized with a single leader on top if the process of differentiation continues long
enough. This also leads to concentration of power. In the limit, if left unchecked, the
most powerful member would have WXX% of the resources and the others would
have X%. Clearly, getting anywhere close to this distribution is inefficient for the
goals of the group. The resulting discontent is the main historical reason for revolt.
Corruption happens when a minority subgroup collects the power or wealth of an or-
ganization for its own benefit at the expense of the larger group.1 Corruption is the
type of friction that provokes our greatest moral indignation, as it offends our funda-
mental sense of fairness.
The more rigid the structure, the more susceptible the organization is to corruption.
There is no protocol rigidity at the chaos stage, so there is no opportunity for corrup-
tion—since there is no group goal there is no opportunity to subvert it. At the decen-
tralized organizational stage, the group is unified by vague goals and vague protocols
that roughly follow the ideals that unite the group. In this case, the notion of corrup-
tion itself is vague and impermanent, open to interpretation and reevaluation. As a
hierarchy begins to emerge, the original occupiers of the varied roles remember
their initial motivations for organizing and remain cooperative without relying on
formal rules. Their founders’ zeal maintains their collaboration. At the final stage of a
centralized organization, success of the group serves to fix the hierarchy. The ideals
become mundane secular rules. As the hierarchy becomes stronger, the power rela-
tionships ossify and inviolable rules naturally emerge. Once these rules are formal-
ized, they become more important for every internal decision than the previous ide-
als which held the group together at the decentralized stage.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 Compare this with the definition of rent-seeking, which is the attempt to gain wealth without recip-
rocally adding wealth or productivity to the group you are participating with.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

Overview and Introduction (cid:0) 5
Corruption is technically inevitable in any hierarchy, since it is impossible to create a
perfectly efficient organization in practice—there is friction in every real system. Fur-
ther, once the rules are set, the natural competitive impulse means its members will
act creatively to intentionally corrupt the system, using the rules and protocols of
the organization to one’s personal advantage instead of advancing the shared goals
of the organization, especially in secular institutions.
Formal secular rules are valuable for ensuring unity in a group with diverse values.
Universal rules can ensure equal application to all members, which satisfies our
sense of fairness. The primary problem with corruption arises with policing the rules.
When the letter of the law is more important than the spirit of the law, then internal
competition for power within the hierarchy reveals the best strategy is to push your
behavior to the limit of what is acceptable. The easiest rules to police are clear in-
fractions of the letter of the law, but these infractions are not the most damaging to
organizational unity. As members constantly probe the edge of acceptable behavior,
policing the rules becomes more expensive. The rules become divorced from the
shared goals. Relationships become brittle and formal instead of warm and loose.
People bristle when violators “getting away with it”. The centralized organization is
destabilized.
The ultimate problem with relying on letter-of-the-law governance over spirit-of-the-
law governance is that no static set of logical rules can ever succeed in preventing
corruption. The Folk Theorems of Game Theory (explained in Chapter ^) prove the
point that any rules that can be formally set down can be subverted. Strategies al-
ways exist which follow the rules and yet allow a minority player to profit at the ex-
pense of the majority.
The fact that any set of rules can be corrupted illustrates two necessities for the
long-term stability of any organization, but especially for decentralized organiza-
tions. First, a dynamic governance system must be designed that can adapt the rules
to the circumstances. Second, the organization needs to hold to its ideals, its tran-
scendental values. The spirit of the law must override the letter of the law. If the or-
ganization is governed by transcendental values—ideals that everyone understands
yet they can never practically attain or properly instantiate concretely—then people
have less motivation to probe the limits of acceptable behavior. Less policing is then
required, making the organization more efficient, as time, attention, and resources
can be rightfully directed toward the shared goals of the organization.
Basic idea
Decentralized organization is a natural stage in the evolution of human cooperation.
It is the step between chaos (no organization) and a completed hierarchy (a central-
ized organization).
A centralized hierarchy is the most efficient architecture for solving the particular
limited problem it was designed to address. Centralized organizations have clear
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

6 (cid:0) Overview and Introduction
lines of power and clear membership rules, which leads to formalized rules of behav-
ior. Power is organized rigidly and clearly, so there is little wasted effort deciding
who is in charge of which task while attempting to cooperate. There is also no
wasted effort from redundant actions in a perfectly centralized organization—each
member would have a unique job that doesn’t overlap with any other member’s du-
ties. Centralization is an optimal and natural evolutionary solution to most specific
organizational problems, under static conditions. Competition is the most common
driving force that leads to a centralized structure.
But centralization is not the optimal organizational structure under highly dynamic
conditions. The usual strengths of centralized hierarchies become their greatest
weaknesses.
Ossification. Rigid power allocation means the organization can’t easily reorganize to
adapt to unanticipated challenges from the outside.
Corruption. Clear rules lead to internal corruption when the letter of the law over-
rides the spirit of the law and members compete for power.
Blindness. New sources of information are ignored since they don’t have existing
lines to the decision-making authorities. Information at the edge is lost.
These three weaknesses play off and intensify each other. In the face of a changing
environment, a rigid organization is blind to and ignores new information that is in-
compatible to the preexisting structure. But, this new information remains highly
valuable. And so, an opportunity is born for an individual to exploit this opportunity
for personal advantage since the organization was too rigid to take advantage of the
opportunity collectively in pursuit of their shared goals. Even if corruption can be
avoided in the beginning, the rigidity still leads centralized organizations to cata-
strophic ends, as failures naturally push members to cling ever more faithfully to the
rules that have saved them in the past, making the system even more rigid and brit-
tle.2
Decentralized organizations, on the other hand, thrive under the types of changing
circumstances that break centralized organizations. Information at the edge is natu-
rally incorporated and communicated so the system can adapt to external threats.
Decentralized organizations are more stable. They don’t crash in response to new ex-
ternal problems like crystalline hierarchies do. Decentralizing allows an organization
to adapt to change and chaos. Decentralization, while it may be seen as wastefully
redundant, gives every member greater autonomous power. Centralization limits its
members’ powers, reducing them to mere cogs in the machine. To contrast with our
previous example, if new information or a new situation arises, it is more likely to be
recognized by someone at the edges (i.e. not blind), who is empowered to act on this
information and take advantage of the opportunity (i.e. not rigid). But, because indi-
viduals within the organization are motivated by the spirit of the shared goals of the
organization (and not by complying with the mundane rules of the organization),
(cid:0)(cid:0)
2 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_last_stands (Retrieved C/DD/EF).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

Overview and Introduction (cid:0) 7
they seize the opportunity not for mere personal benefit, but for the collective bene-
fit of the organization (i.e. not corrupt).
The goal of this book is to show that advances in technology have given decentral-
ized systems the efficiency they have lacked in previous eras and that allowed them
to be outcompeted by centralized systems. And, along with the virtues of respon-
siveness and resiliency, the newly realized efficiency makes decentralized systems
the model for our times. But, we also want to understand whether there is anything
that can destroy them? What threatens decentralized systems? And how might de-
centralized systems ward off these threats?
What can destroy a decentralized organization? Nothing. Decentralized organiza-
tions are invincible unless every single member loses their adherence to the values
that organized it in the first place, which may happen if they transform and central-
ize under a different value which takes precedent. Centralization is a natural state
that evolves from decentralization under competition if it is not consciously pre-
vented by guarding members’ power. It is clear how a centralized organization can
be conquered—the single point of failure at the top. How can we prevent an organi-
zation from centralizing? How do we protect individual autonomy in a decentralized
organization? How do we make our institutions more resilient with decentralization?
Different organizations throughout history have struck upon a variety of answers.
The goal of this book is to revisit these historical strategies and explain how recent
advances in information technology give us new solutions to these problems.
History
The cycle from chaos, to decentralized organization, to centralized organization is
natural and attends human institutions throughout history.
Advances in information technology explain each historical leap in organizational ef-
ficiency and reach. The evolution of ever more complex human societies moves from
kinship tribes to regional clans to kingdoms to corporations (religious and secular) to
nation-states to empires to the emerging global society. This evolution is enabled at
each stage by advances in information technology. Information storage, processing,
and transmission allows larger groups of people to effectively connect and cooper-
ate. Information technology has advanced from the spoken word (communication
and storage), to complex ideas (processing and storage), to written word (communi-
cation and storage), to schools and bureaucracies (processing), to printing presses
(communication and storage), to telegraphs and telephones (communication), to
digital computers (processing and storage), to the internet (communication, storage,
processing).
In Chapter W we examine the history and evolution of religion and law, politics and
business, from the lens of centralization versus decentralization. We use the exam-
ples of history to illustrate how decentralization stabilizes organizations, by ensuring
their members’ autonomy, which makes the group more adaptable. These historical
sketches show how to build decentralization into an organization, detail the natural
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

8 (cid:0) Overview and Introduction
threats to a decentralized organization, and explain how to defend against them. An-
cient Egypt and China were remarkably stable for thousands of years due to the pro-
tocol decentralization fostered by their Rule of Virtue legal system. The Apache tribe
used political decentralization to survive for hundreds of years against vastly better-
equipped centralized empires whose goal was to eliminate their way of life. The Ma-
ghribis built a sophisticated decentralized trade network using WWth century infor-
mation technology, and reputation. Wcth century farmers used dynamic governance
designs to create the most powerful decentralized organization in history.
Present
Today, many centralized institutions are experiencing the senescence that naturally
attends their rigidity, their internal corruption, and their predictable failure to re-
spond to novel external challenges. This is provoked in obvious fashion from the
massive cultural and social changes due to rapid technological advancement.
New technology for data storage (cheap hard drives), processing (computers), and
communication (telephone and internet) give new tools for enabling centralized and
decentralized structures of organization. These new tools make people much more
powerful than ever before.
Western democracies are still using the structures developed decades or centuries
ago, and lack any formal interaction with this new data stream. Private, centralized
companies are adapting much faster than our aging centralized legal and govern-
mental institutions to leverage the power of the latest leaps in information technol-
ogy. The most obvious ways to adapt our supposedly decentralized democracies to
these new technologies of information storage, processing and transmission would
be:
• Polling constituents—on past, present, and future issues. Put polls in con-
text—reveal how many constituents from which districts voted in which
way—how many didn’t vote. Mandate the goal of providing intuitive user
interfaces for accessing statistical knowledge, so people can parse the data
easily.
(information processing)
• Stack Exchange-like websites (or Reddit or Facebook) for people to broad-
cast their opinions and upvote/downvote other people’s posts. Require
open source algorithms for how information is filtered, so analyses can be
made, and everyone can understand if and how the system is being gamed
by special interests.
(information transmission)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

Overview and Introduction (cid:0) 9
• Bureaucratic transparency—Build open source websites detailing executive
expenditures. Make it easy to access your representatives. Use a uniform
accounting scheme of the official work all legislative representatives have
done (speeches they’ve made, votes, meetings with lobbyists, constituents,
transcripts of those meetings). A radical proposal would make it illegal to
speak about public matters while a politician is in office unless they are on
the record, holding politicians to the professional standards of lawyers and
equity investors. Mandate the goal of making public data on justice easier
to access, to expose more information on our institutions’ integrity or cor-
ruption.
(information storage)
These first simple steps provide some examples as to what could potentially lead to
more formal interactions with decentralized democracy, such as binding referenda
on basic expenditures, which could revitalize our institutions. Weth century technol-
ogy naturally limited our formal democratic interactions with government to bian-
nual elections of representatives. fWst century technology is completely different; so-
ciety is different. And our governmental structures need to change. How do we save
democracy? Simple. Make our societies more democratic.
These changes would be technologically trivial to implement, cutting and pasting ex-
isting open source projects. This is quite unlikely to happen naturally, however, with-
out a powerful catalyst—coherent social demand. Large decentralized networks, like
national democracies, don’t make fundamental changes easily. Stability is their pri-
mary quality.
Meanwhile, in a testament to the power and effectiveness of centralization, capital-
ist companies are rapidly innovating new uses for this torrent of decentralized infor-
mation from traffic (virtual and IRL, such as Google and Baidu, and Google Maps),
marketplace transactions (Amazon, Alibaba, and Airbnb), social networks (Facebook
and Tencent), and economic talent (gig economy industries like Uber and UpWork).
Webf.X has built the user interfaces (UIs) necessary to leverage the talent of the
masses with these tools.
Before advances in blockchain tech and cryptographic security, such companies
needed a centralized authority for several reasons. A dictatorship was necessary for
governance of the network, because more sophisticated governance architectures,
such as democracies, lacked the ability to govern efficiently. With Weth century tech-
nology, millions of members could only be practically polled on a yearly basis. In that
case, centralized institutions were necessary, since they are far more efficient in
communicating with members, storing the relevant information and history of the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

10 (cid:0) Overview and Introduction
company, and filtering and curating the information to reward members appropri-
ately. But information technology has changed, giving us new options for the govern-
ance of large networks of participants.
The technologies and technological trends that enabled the advances in telecommu-
nications, internet proliferation, e-commerce, the digital transformation of society,
social media, and the Internet of Things have inaugurated unprecedented societal
network capability. These advances are gateways for the deeper structural reform of
society.
Decentralization tools in social media demonstrate how networked communication
structures allow social groups to cooperate and co-create at an unprecedented level,
transcending previous barriers due to nationality and socio-economic status. Webg is
the vision of building tools for decentralizing our economy in a similar way.
Webg initiatives such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, IPFS, and many others are building some
of the tools necessary to allow decentralized organizations devoted to business
goals. The technology is advancing to the point that fully decentralized organizations
are beginning to compete with centralized organizations in profitable enterprises.
And decentralized organizations have fundamentals which are superior in our rapidly
changing global society. Unlike centralized organizations, decentralized organizations
can give members individual autonomy and privacy, they maintain network stability
under changing conditions, and they thrive under information transparency.
Future
The stated purpose of Webg is to build the tools to empower decentralized networks
to compete with traditional centralized networks, using blockchains, distributed hash
tables, and more complex peer-to-peer (PfP) architectures.
Bitcoin and Ethereum are building decentralized money and decentralized auto-
mated business contracts (smart contracts). These networks are worth hundreds of
billions of dollars, not because people are using them, but almost entirely because of
speculation. People see the future value of these tools. Their future value is the
dream that people will use them to build DAOs.
DAO is the Webg acronym for decentralized autonomous organization. “Autono-
mous” is to distinguish DAOs from less decentralized organizations (like Wikipedia)
which still have ultimate centralized control in an owner (like Jimmy Wales, co-
founder of Wikipedia) who can finalize contentious decisions among its members.
The autonomous aspect of a DAO stems from its programmed governance system
through smart contracts. A DAO is ultimately democratic, instead of having a benev-
olent dictator behind the scenes to efficiently correct course during black swan
events.3
(cid:0)(cid:0)
3 Everyone knows there are only white swans. There is no such thing as a black swan, and there is no
reason to look for one—until somebody sees one. Then everyone says their existence was obvious. A
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

Overview and Introduction (cid:0) 11
Marketplace DAOs can now supply level playing fields where nobody is in charge (un-
like Amazon). Decentralized finance (deFi) uses blockchain technology to provide fi-
nancial tools such as banking, equity investment, and derivatives trading. DeFi prom-
ises to empower people with broader financial inclusion with new financial tools
with lower transaction costs and open access across borders.
Social network DAOs and web traffic can be organized on a peer-to-peer architec-
ture, where members opt in or out of participating in data filtering and curating. In-
dividuals can completely control their information and share it precisely with whom-
ever they wish (unlike Facebook or Google) and can be remunerated fairly for the
effort.
Ridesharing applications and other gig economy industries can be completely man-
aged and governed with peer-to-peer reputational systems (unlike Uber), so mem-
bership in a network gives appropriate ownership of the network, as opposed to the
asymmetry of merely being a user.
The Webg dream of the future is for DAOs to replace centralized structures with
more efficient and adaptable groups throughout our society and economy.
Two important tools have been built, decentralized money (Bitcoin) and decentral-
ized contracts (Ethereum). But it won’t work until eight more decentralized institu-
tions are built that people use to do business. Money and contracts are worthless in
business with barbarians who can’t be trusted to keep a bargain. To do business, we
need a system where reputation means something. We have the bones of such
structures, but we need to put the flesh on the animal. Then it can dance.
Let’s begin.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
black swan event is a unique and unpredictable event which has a major effect on the economy. The
theory was developed by Nassim Taleb, who argued these events have a dominant role in human
history, but that fact is not properly recognized, because humans naturally rationalize the effects af-
terwards as predictable. Examples include the effects of World War I, the internet, or the EFEF Covid-
DS Pandemic in changing global economies.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

12 (cid:0) Overview and Introduction
Bibliography
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782192

