Preface: Two Perspectives 1
Preface to “Decentralization”
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
This Preface summarizes the authors’ respective perspectives and precepts on
the topic of decentralization that motivated the publication of their jointly authored
book "DECENTRALIZATION - TECHNOLOGY'S IMPACT ON ORGANIZATIONAL AND S
OCIETAL STRUCTURE", DEGRUYTER PUBLISHERS (2021).
United by a deep passion for decentralized technology and its prospect and po-
tential for the future of humanity, the authors provide a general overview of their
unique motivations to collaborate on this book. The passion for decentralized socie-
tal solutions is motivated by distinct yet supplemental perspectives on decentraliza-
tion which have inspired the book.
In this book we hope to share some of the insights we’ve gleaned from computer
science and graph theory, from game theory and category theory, from history and
international relations, from social science and economics, applied to our chaotically
churning technologically revolutionary moment in the present global business envi-
ronment and social atmosphere.
The journey the authors have taken together is being taken every day organically
by broader society. The clean and clear, logically coherent theory of hard science and
mathematics needs to reconcile itself with the messy and confusing, logically incon-
sistent hard realities of international issues of economics and law and social science.
The precise tools of computer science are being used and abused by humans, with all
their diverse range of motivations—from idealistic generosity to malicious selfishness,
from group scapegoating to individual aspiration—together on the same platforms,
on social media, in international forums, and in cities around the world as diverse
communities are merging in new social permutations.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

2 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
Authors’ Background
As an economist and lawyer, Wulf Kaal’s scholarship has been motivated by a desire
to create functional institutional designs since his early Ph.D. training days as a mentee
of a leading scholar on new institutional economics. Over time, Wulf’s scholarly inter-
est in institutional design and governance morphed into work on the economic theory
of dynamic governance, dynamic regulatory structures, crypto economics, decentral-
ized infrastructure products, and incentive design mechanisms in decentralized sys-
tems, including via co-authored articles with Craig Calcaterra.
Craig Calcaterra is an expert on abstract dynamical systems in mathematics who
brings a unique skillset to architecture and design mechanisms in decentralized sys-
tems. Craig’s Ph.D. training in mathematics and particular expertise in control theory
and stochastic dynamics gives him a useful perspective for modeling and analyzing
global economic and social systems with their diverse moving parts and complex inner
relationships.
Preface: Two perspectives
What is decentralization? A lawyer’s perspective from Wulf Kaal
No two minds will agree on a common definition of decentralization. The word “de-
centralization” triggers different associations in different people, depending on the
totality of their experiences, socialization, and socio-economic upbringing. On the ex-
treme ends, where one person will see opportunity, development, and a natural evo-
lution, others will perceive risk, destruction, and societal doom.
Most people still see decentralization from the vantage point of centralized systems
and hierarchical structures. That is very much understandable. Out of necessity, hu-
mans have engaged in centralized thinking since the emergence of tribal societies
and throughout urbanization and the industrial revolution to today. Throughout his-
tory, people have been subject to the apparent chaos of natural decentralization and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 3
sought comfort in centralization. Centralization brings structure to the natural de-
centralized order of things. Centralization brings control, convenience, and effi-
ciency.
Because of hierarchical structures, centrally organized entities allocate resources
with minimal loss of energy and can identify and remove waste in the system. Cen-
tralized production methods efficiently reduce per unit costs. Centralized organiza-
tion of society leads to efficient resource extraction, rent seeking, and the creation
of economies of scale. Yet, increasing evidence suggests that humanity’s centralized
economic expansion and associated natural resource extraction are unsustainable.
Other indicators suggest that centralized organization of society has in many ways
reached limitations: the general weakening legitimacy of the public sector; increas-
ing economic decline; disillusionment with existing business, political, and social in-
stitutions; inadequate response to emergent geopolitical problems; and global and
international pressure on countries with inefficient, undemocratic, overly centralized
systems. Even centralized technologies which previously enabled more sustainable
solutions encounter capacity issues. For example, the increasing connectivity of soci-
ety via the internet has resulted, according to some estimates, in the need for decen-
tralized authentication protocols.
Decentralization is saving the world. Decentralized technology and ecosystems are
correcting human-created centralized destruction. Humanity’s unsustainable central-
ized economic expansion and associated natural resource extraction are counter-
acted by decentralized technology solutions. For example, the disillusionment with
existing political institutions’ ability to address economic hardships that emerged in
the aftermath of the financial crisis of bccd-e gave rise to a new form of technologi-
cal decentralization. The Bitcoin protocol emerged in bcce as an attempt by its
founders to provide a decentralized alternative to the shortcomings of the financial
system.
Bitcoin and its progeny spawned a slew of additional decentralized protocols and de-
centralized technology attempts and solutions that provide a gateway to future
forms of technological decentralization. The evolution of decentralized protocols,
ecosystems, and platforms, in turn, may provide unprecedented democratic forms of
organizing business and society and coordinating human behavior. The emergence
and proliferation of distributed applications (DApps) in the aftermath of the inven-
tion of the Bitcoin protocol in bcce demonstrate that a nascent market for such ap-
plications and consumer demand already exists. Consumer preferences will continue
to shape the DApps market and the solutions it may offer for commerce and society.
Unlike other societal phenomena, decentralization appears as a natural default solu-
tion for societal issues. Change in business and society is often accompanied by dras-
tic measures and long public debates along political lines. For example, the occur-
rence of globalization in technology, business, politics, and society, was subject to
long drawn-out public debates about the possible effects and risks. By contrast, the
decentralization of business and society is mostly a quiet occurrence without much
media attention that appears as a default solution based on the existing centralized
network infrastructure. Decentralization is incremental and iterative and a natural
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

4 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
default solution that is based on existing networks. Existing centralized businesses
and business networks are increasingly combined with decentralized elements.
Definition?
An understanding of decentralization depends to some degree on its delineation
from its centralized counterparts. In other words, a definition of what centralization
in a given context, industry, or field of study means also helps define what decentral-
ization in this context can mean. The definition of decentralization changes based on
the kind of decentralization, the industry or field, application, and the overall con-
text. What may apply in the context of political decentralization may not at all be
relevant in the context of technological decentralization. Organizational decentrali-
zation, market decentralization, societal decentralization, among others, all empha-
size different aspects of decentralization. Yet, each different kind of decentralization
may have knock-on effects on the others. Accordingly, a definition of decentraliza-
tion necessitates an inclusive scope that derives from its core characteristics.
Defining decentralization through historically formed centralized perspectives is a
contradiction in terms. It undermines the true potential of decentralization. While
even fully networked and decentralized systems are still subject to centralized ele-
ments, such as the agreement on certain terms and meanings in language, using a
centralized understanding of a subject to explain what decentralization of that sub-
ject could mean limits the scope and scale of decentralized approaches. For example,
decentralization is not just the addition of hierarchical levels in a centralized organi-
zation; decentralization is not just the redistribution of centrally organized authority
or redistribution of centrally collected revenue; decentralization is not just the dele-
gation of centralized authority to managers on all levels of an organization. Termino-
logically, decentralization is not just synonymous with delegation, deconcentration,
disassortative, devolution, circulation, or partnership.
Even the basic societal norms instantiated in the subsidiarity principle can not fully
encapsulate the essence of emerging decentralization. The subsidiarity principle is a
general principle of social organization. It suggests that social and political issues
should be addressed at the most immediate level that is consistent with the resolu-
tion of the issue. Decisions should be made by the government entity that is closest
to the populations affected by a given issue. The subsidiarity principle is deeply
rooted in existing legal frameworks and it is a general principle of the European Un-
ion. While local government may be closer to the concerns of the people and better
able to respond to the preferences of its citizens, subsidiarity alone cannot encapsu-
late the ontology and desirable outcomes of decentralization.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 5
Technical Delineation
The degree of decentralization can be delineated by distinguishing several core con-
cepts such as logical decentralization, architectural decentralization, and political de-
centralization. While these core concepts are distinguishable, some overlap is una-
voidable.
An example from the legal system helps illustrate the overlapping concepts of logical
decentralization, architectural or hardware decentralization, and political or govern-
ance decentralization. Both civil and common law are logically centralized as all deci-
sion-making power goes back to what the respective legal bodies ordained. Com-
mon law is based for the most part on legal precedents created by a diverse body of
individual judges. By contrast, civil law relies mostly on a centralized parliamentary
or legislative decision-making body. Architectural decentralization is disparate in civil
and common law as common law has more decentralized power in the individual
courts and jurisdictions that create the precedent. Governance decentralization is
low in both common and civil law as only a limited number of decision-making au-
thorities, courts and parliament, have the ability to make changes to the body of law
that apply to all of the law’s subjects.
The firm—that is, a traditional corporation—provides another example to delineate
logical decentralization, architectural decentralization, and governance decentraliza-
tion. The firm is logically centralized as a division of the firm would typically break it
apart and it would not be able to operate independently as two separate parts. This
is traceable to the firm’s hierarchical order that creates efficiencies and structure.
The firm is also architecturally centralized as it typically is governed through one
physically centralized headquarter or office. The governance of the firm is also typi-
cally centralized as only a select few can make changes that affect the totality of indi-
viduals involved with the firm.
Natural Decentralization
Nature’s ecosystem provides an illustration of natural decentralization. The natural
ecosystem is composed of the community of living and non-living organisms whose
interaction is facilitated by chemical, biological, and physical processes in sunlight,
air, water, soil, plants, microorganisms and animals. No central organism or system
dictates when, where, and how the interactions materialize and how living and non-
living organisms proliferate and evolve.
The natural ecosystem epitomizes the characteristics of decentralized systems. The
intelligent order in the natural ecosystem is distributed throughout the system with-
out central coordination. Information on environmental factors that influence organ-
isms’ existence and development naturally, filter into the edges of the ecosystem in
real-time. Random genetic mutation of organisms is further enhanced through dy-
namic feedback effects on environmental factors that benefit a given mutation and
accelerate its survivability in that environment. Mutated and adaptable organisms
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

6 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
become more attack resistant in comparison with the original population. In turn,
the ability to mutate via feedback effects for enhanced adaptability allows the
adapted organism to proliferate more quickly than the original population.
Nature provides systems that create spontaneous order. Nature provides several
prominent examples of spontaneous order and coordination of self-organizing be-
havior. Slime molds, flocks of birds, ant colonies, and schools of fish exhibit emer-
gent and self-organizing behavior in which interactions and feedback effects be-
tween self-sufficient individuals create spontaneous order. Unrelated eukaryotic
organisms, aka slime mold, are capable of existing without constraints as single cells,
but can also congregate to form multicellular reproductive structures. Spontaneous
order is less likely to emerge unconstrained from interactions dispersed across a sys-
tem if the system has a power or information center. Distributed self-organizing sys-
tems are nimbler and able to efficiently self-repair at points of local failure through
coordination without control.
The natural ecosystem evolved randomly with an inherent order and interdependent
structure. Take for example how crops grow in nature. Crops grow best where the
conditions made available by nature are most ideal. Flora and fauna quasi-randomly
interact with each other to effectuate that growth. Flora, that is, plant life, develops
in a particular region or time; the corresponding fauna, that is, animal life, supple-
ments that development and grows. Birds take seeds and crops from one meadow to
another area. Or, the wind blows certain seeds across vast areas of land until they
find more fertile soil, and so forth.
Interoperability and interdependence characterize the development of the natural
ecosystem. Flora and fauna are interdependent. Animals cannot develop in a given
part of the planet if they do not have access to the right kinds of food that enable
their evolution and survivability. In turn, animals enable plants to flourish in parts of
the planet where they previously could not exist.
The equilibrium in the natural ecosystem is facilitated by the decentralized coordina-
tion of interdependent organisms. The equilibrium in the natural ecosystem is cre-
ated not by a centralized dictator who examines the needs of non-living and living
organisms. Rather, nature’s equilibrium materializes through a balancing of the in-
teractions in chemical, biological, and physical processes. Ecological systems are usu-
ally in homeostatis, that is, in a stable equilibrium. If a given part of the ecosystem
gets out of balance, the system typically naturally self-corrects. The system corrects
small changes, such as the size of a particular population growing too quickly,
through negative feedback. The feedback brings the changed parameter in the sys-
tem back to its original equilibrium. This facilitates that the changed parameter can
again correspond optimally with the rest of the system.
The process of mitosis, or cell division, provides a natural precedent and overview of
the role of governance in decentralized systems. Mitosis is the process in nature
whereby the nucleus of a single cell divides into two identical daughter cells which
thereafter contain the same genetic information and functionality as the original cell.
After mitosis, both cells are independently fully functional. Because of apoptosis,
that is programmed cell death, cell replacement via mitosis is vital. The purpose of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 7
mitosis is growth, cell regeneration, and the removal of worn out or damaged cells.
Without mitosis, organisms could not be functional and would die. The cell nucleus,
that is typically a single rounded structure bounded by a double membrane, contain-
ing the genetic material, enables the process of mitosis. Similarly, in decentralized
systems, information, and any functionality that depends on information, is continu-
ously changing. As parts of system information are being outdated by the naturally
changing environment, they need to be replaced to keep the entire system opera-
tional. Like mitosis, this decentralized governance process has to be autonomous
and automated in the system. Decentralized governance has to be able to evolve and
mutate and create new information precedent for the continuous efficient operation
of the system. The nucleus of the decentralized system is the information (contained
in the code) that constitutes the architecture and incentive design of the decentral-
ized operating system. It facilitates the information exchange.
The standard model of particle physics provides perhaps the strongest argument
against natural decentralized evolution. While naturally incomplete, the standard
model of particle physics is the most complete model science created to describe the
observable physical cosmos. It suggests that the entire physical cosmos can be
traced back to a single point. Science has no answers as to what came before. If com-
bined with the theory of natural selection, which suggests that all life on earth could
be traced back to a single cell organism, the standard model of particle physics
would counteract decentralized evolutionary theories. Yet, single point origin does
not counteract the multiplicity of design mechanism in the following evolution.
Nature evolved through natural selection: a naturally decentralized selection mecha-
nism. No centralized authority determines which organisms can survive when and
where. Rather, the interaction of the community of living and non-living organisms
by way of chemical, biological, and physical processes and the totality of environ-
mental factors dictates which species survive and flourish. Because natural selection
is a complex process involving multiple interconnected causes with adaptation to the
natural environment at its core, natural selection involves a given population with
distinguishable characteristics. Variability is heritable. Random genetic mutations in-
crease variability. No centralized order determines in what environment certain
characteristics are ideally suitable for enhanced survivability. Rather, the population
with the traits that are most adaptable and heritable has a natural comparative ad-
vantage. The natural selection of the most adaptable and survivable population char-
acteristics materializes without a centralized mechanism. Even characteristics that
appeared at the edges of a given ecosystem may be most ideally suited for surviva-
bility.
Technological Extension of the Decentralized Natural Order
The natural order emerged through decentralized coordination. Humans centralized
parts of the decentralized natural order to enable human proliferation. In turn, in-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

8 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
creasing evidence suggests that technology enables a decentralized extension of so-
cietal organization and human achievement. Emerging decentralized technology
could transform the digital universe into a complex adaptive system of the kinds
found in nature.
Human utilization of nature provides a prominent example of centralized order in
decentralized systems. Throughout history, humanity has been subject to the appar-
ent chaos of nature and sought comfort in centralized control over it. The creation of
property rights over the natural order of things enabled centralized efficiency for hu-
man achievements. Centralized urbanization provided protection and efficiency from
the chaos of nature. Humans centralized parts of the natural order to create econo-
mies of scale that would otherwise not be possible within the natural order. For ex-
ample, to control where the most beneficial conditions allow crops to flourish and
result in a significant harvest, farmers try to control the environment and soil that al-
low their crops to grow optimally. Creating the conditions to grow most of a certain
type of crop in the shortest amount of time allows farmers to more effectively con-
trol the output of their efforts and create economies of scale that would not be pos-
sible within the natural order.
The evolving decentralization of business and society is a form of a decentralized ex-
tension of the existing societal organization and human achievement. As organiza-
tional centralization reaches natural limitations, decentralized organizational ele-
ments become more prevalent. For example, internet-based platform businesses try
to make organizational hierarchies flatter to increase creativity and output and instill
a culture of “best idea wins.” The farthest extension of these ideals is instantiated in
the decentralized autonomous organization (DAO), an organization that only exists in
code. Similarly, as business reaches natural frontiers, it extends its reach via decen-
tralized structures. Companies like eBay and Amazon provide examples of central-
ized companies that decentralized the customer experience. These companies use
the structure, control, and associated profit optimization of centralized entities and
combine it with the bottom-up approach of decentralization in the form of customer
reviews.
Decentralized technology is part of a natural extension of the decentralized origin of
human tool-making. For example, just as language became a tool for the optimiza-
tion of human outputs, decentralization can help coordinate and optimize human ef-
forts and outputs. This is exemplified by emerging decentralized technology’s ability
to remove the inefficiencies and costs associated with intermediation. For example,
cost free value transfer via decentralized technologies removes the cost for migrant
workers. In bcge, worldwide remittance has replaced foreign direct investment in to-
tal value across borders.
Decentralized evolution is an extension of naturally decentralized development. As
decentralized solutions morph and proliferate, they follow existing natural network
patterns and precedents. Technology-driven decentralized systems depend on an ex-
isting infrastructure. Just as predator populations could not evolve in the natural
ecosystem without prey, decentralized technology systems cannot evolve without an
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 9
existing decentralized infrastructure. Generations of increasingly networked solu-
tions enable an evolution of decentralized systems.
Basics of Decentralization
Decentralized systems depend on network effects. Network effects occur when in-
creasing numbers of participants or users in a given network improve the value of
network access for the entirety of the users. An example that illustrates network ef-
fects for an existing network is the internet. When the internet had very few users it
was of limited value. As its user base increased, the totality of users benefitted from
an ever-increasing use and application of internet connectivity as products and ser-
vices on the internet proliferated. Similarly, eBay, the internet-based auction site,
proliferated as more users offered their products for auction. The more people offer
and bid, the higher the potential prices of products on eBay and the more new
sellers are incentivized to join because they see that the totality of users on eBay en-
ables them to sell their products. However, a network’s infrastructure can compro-
mise its network effects and associated user benefits.
Intelligence is widely dispersed throughout decentralized systems. Because of the
lack of traditional coordination hierarchies and the lack of central intelligence, the
information and intelligence in decentralized systems is more dispersed throughout
the system. Information and knowledge exchange naturally occur and filter in at the
edges of decentralized systems. No guarantee exists in a decentralized system that
the randomly-generated information is accurate. That is the case on Amazon and on
the internet in general where there is no real attempt to clean the data. These are
exactly the type of shortcomings future decentralized infrastructure products, such
as a decentralized verification engine, need to address.
Information production is localized and subject to feedback effects in decentralized
systems. Relevant information occurs randomly at the edges of decentralized sys-
tems and its relevance is determined by an initial group of users. The information is
then transferred to other peers who realize the relevance of a given piece of infor-
mation for their own needs. As the application of the information changes, depend-
ing on which groups and subgroups of peers in the decentralized network use it, the
changed relevance of the original piece of information is then transmitted back to
the original information generator who evaluates it and either applies it or further
amends it. This feedback constantly updates and optimizes the quality of infor-
mation.
Feedback effects enable decentralized coordination. The feedback effects in decen-
tralized systems not only update and optimize the quality of information. They also
increase the relevancy of the applications of the information. As peers in decentral-
ized systems analyze a given set of information they receive, they also examine the
application of this information for their own needs. For example, contributors in
Wikipedia are engaged in the pursuit of knowledge in a constant feedback loop with
other contributors pertaining to a given entry on Wikipedia. Similarly, the use of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

10 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
computer code as a template for a smart contract enables individual creators to ben-
efit from the input of others. The code originates in a smaller subgroup of a peer-to-
peer network. The subgroup users examine the applicability of a given computer
code template for their own uses. If the code passes muster, it may be included in a
slightly changed or enhanced instantiation. The enhancement, in turn, may provide
feedback to the originator group, and so forth. The feedback enables coordination of
most relevant information.
The values and core belief systems of members provide cohesion and longevity in
decentralized systems. For example, contributors to Wikipedia share a common be-
lief in the power of the crowd, that decentralized collaboration for the pursuit of
knowledge creates superior outputs. They collaborate because their values and core
beliefs in knowledge creation unite them in a common cause.
Independent and autonomous subgroups create the backbone of decentralized
structures. Subgroups are formed randomly based on individual members’ ability to
contribute to the common cause of the group. Members of the subgroup are typi-
cally equal and trust one another. For example, Wikipedia members are making con-
tributions to the common cause of knowledge development in a subgroup of individ-
uals that contribute to a particular entry. Each individual has a certain expertise
pertaining to the entry. Collaboration is independent and autonomous. Some mem-
bers write articles, others edit, and still others further optimize the entry. Contribu-
tors to Wikipedia trust each other to create and edit entries for the pursuit of
knowledge and each is motivated to contribute to the best of their abilities. Norms
of behavior evolve organically from the community, supplementing the basic set of
rules provided and enforced by Wikipedia to coordinate member conduct and create
and reinforce trust in the subgroup.
As decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) emerge through decentralized
technology, the value systems in DAOs are a determining factor for membership and
cohesion. The desire to be connected via a DAO to like-minded individuals has two
value propositions. First, individuals elect to join a DAO and thus signal their desire
to cooperate in a decentralized network. Second, individuals select their particular
DAO based on their values and interests. DAO members will choose to join a DAO if it
corresponds with their existing expertise, inclinations, knowledge base, and beliefs.
The apparent intelligence chaos increases attack resistance in decentralized systems.
Centralized coordination enables attack coordination because the hierarchical struc-
ture allows the identification of a single point of failure. The apparent intelligence
chaos in decentralized systems, where information filters in at the edges of the sys-
tem in real time, allows it to morph constantly. Decentralized systems can very easily
mutate because the information flow is optimized through dynamic decentralized
feedback effects. That ability to change without central coordination increases the
attack resistance of decentralized systems.
Decentralized systems are more attack resistant, allocate information more effec-
tively and use feedback effects for superior learning effects that optimize perfor-
mance over time. Community and the efficient sharing of resources are more im-
portant in decentralized systems.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 11
Centralization and decentralization are foundationally different approaches. Where
centralization attempts to make sense of and create order in presumptive chaos, de-
centralization thrives in perceived chaos. Where centralization creates efficiencies
via order, inefficiencies open new opportunities for participants in decentralized net-
works. Where centralization orders information, and presses it into a certain form,
decentralization takes information from random places and utilizes it in new applica-
tions. Where centralization limits creativity through preset processes, decentraliza-
tion frees the creative process. Where centralization creates hierarchies and sub-
structures, decentralization removes hierarchies and structures and reorganizes in
new ways.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

12 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
What is decentralization? A mathematician’s perspective from
Craig Calcaterra
Figure 1:Common answer to the question, "What is decentralization?"
“The above image says it all.” –Rahul Behera, Content Director for Cryp-
tosomniac.com March e, bcgd, Quora
No, it doesn’t.
Figure g may be a good first attempt at answering the meaning of decentralization.
But it’s vague and misleading. The closer you look, the more flawed it is. This figure is
reproduced in many explanations of distributed computing, blockchain or Webk. If
you are going to learn anything from this book, at the least let it be how this figure is
a shallow answer, and wrong.1
Centralized Decentralized
Figure b: A better answer to the difference between centralized and decentralized.
The ideal centralized configuration is a directed tree/hierarchy. The ideal decentral-
ized configuration is a complete undirected graph.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 The word distributed is often conflated with decentralized, for good reason, because distributed
means IT duties (information storage or processing or communication) are spread across many differ-
ent nodes. But the concepts of distributed and decentralized shouldn’t be contrasted. Decentralized
networks are always distributed; distributed networks may or may not be under centralized control.
So “distributed” doesn’t even belong in the same image.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 13
Centralized means there is one person who is ultimately responsible for all decision
making—“The buck stops here.” Or there is one computer in charge of how infor-
mation is processed. The first graph in Figure b indicates how all the dots (which rep-
resent nodes, or members of the network) must answer to the central node.2
The ideal centralized network is a tree graph, for example, an org chart in a com-
pany. It has a root to the tree, the leader. And it has branches which take orders
from the root.
Figure k: Credit: Paul Johnson, University of Sheffield, bcgm. (**update to include ar-
rows)
This left image of centralization in Figure k might represent the power structure of a
god, which may be a good description of the experience of a typical app when the
user is at the owner’s mercy.
An org chart or a tree graph representation of a centralized organization plainly dis-
plays the advantage of a hierarchical structure. Everyone has a clear role in the or-
ganization. Their responsibilities and power are obvious from their position. The car-
rots and sticks can be clearly arranged, efficiently. In fact, no topology is more
efficient for this purpose.3 Decisions made by a central leader can be carried out
quickly and effectively.
Therefore, the best mathematical representation of a centralized hierarchy is a di-
rected tree graph. The power flows only one way.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
2 A note about nodes: Put simply, nodes are the little dots in any graph. Nodes represent the members
of the network. Computer scientists often think of nodes as the different computers connected in a
network. The number, variety, and connectivity of the nodes in a system impact how data is generated,
the processing power needed, and the diversity of data produced. The variety and connectivity deter-
mine how much information can come from a network. Decentralization means redundantly, flatly
connected. The more connections a network has, the more resilient it is, and information exchange
increases.
3 Topology is a fancy word for structure, or the pattern of the arrangement of a system. The mathe-
matical meaning is difficult to pin down without more technical definitions, but it roughly means the
pattern that underlies a system when you ignore irrelevant details.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

14 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
King
Lord East Lord West
Knight E1 Knight E2 Knight W1 Knight W2 Knight W3
Peasant 1 Peasant 2 Peasant 3 Peasants
Livestock Cow Pig Goat
Figure 4: Feudal power centralization; part of the Great Chain of Being
Hierarchical centralization is optimally efficient for making big decisions that affect
the entire organization, and so it has historically outcompeted every other organiza-
tional structure, be it corporation or army or government (Figure p). A hierarchy
seems to always eventually emerge, or else the group fails.
Except that’s not entirely true. Centralization comes with two major flaws that inevi-
tably lead to its downfall.
First, every centralized organization has a single point of failure. If the leader is lack-
ing in information, or skill, or wisdom, or charisma, the organization is bound to their
poor decisions.4 In this age of voluminous and immediate information, business and
social circumstances change much faster than ever before. An organization cannot
wait for its leader to make a decision on every new choice the group faces. What is
the alternative?
Secondly, the very success and efficiency of a hierarchy leads its members to become
dependent on it, relying unquestioningly on the institution’s design. The reliable an-
swer to every question is, “chain of command”. People eventually place so much
faith in the structure, it ossifies and becomes rigid. Then, while its structure may still
be capable of handling some old, predictable tasks that the chain of command was
originally designed to solve, the hierarchy may become too inflexible to reorganize
and respond effectively to a novel crisis. (History is the record of the collapse of hier-
archies. Examples include the Catholic Church in response to the Protestant Refor-
mation and the Qing dynasty in response to Western imperialism.) What is the alter-
native?
(cid:0)(cid:0)
4 This is a major reason monarchies have fallen within a few generations of foundation throughout
history.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 15
Decentralized organizations thrive in both of these circumstances, when choices
multiply without bound and when novel crises arise.
Decentralized simply means “not centralized”, so there is no dominant node, no
leader. An example is the architecture of the internet, which was designed so that
control is extremely redundant, as in the complete graph illustrated in Figure s. If
any local cluster goes down, the network will be able to continue functioning with-
out a hiccup. No part of the network is crucial. No part of the network is the absolute
authority. There is no President of the Internet.
The notion of decentralization is captured by any graph which does not have a single
node from which all power flows. The extreme form of decentralization is illustrated
with a completely connected graph as in the image below. The goal of most decen-
tralized networks is to achieve such interconnectivity and flatness of power distribu-
tion or complete equality of its members.
Figure t: A complete graph with d nodes vs simple tree with d nodes—stability vs. ef-
ficiency.
The spectrum between control and freedom
There is no clear-cut, discrete difference between centralized and decentralized.
There is a spectrum between the two that any organization will fall along. The essen-
tial differentiator is the freedom of each member in the network.
In the extreme of centralization, nodes/members have no autonomy, no freedom.
Each node has a clearly defined role in the hierarchy, with explicit instructions for
every behavior, in how and when they can act. With recent advances in information
technology, we can now build dystopias of extreme centralization to a degree that
makes Orwell’s society from gedp seem trivial.
In the extreme of decentralization, every member has complete autonomy and free-
dom. Each member has complete independence, choosing how and whether to par-
ticipate at any given time. With the recent advances in technology, we can now build
systems which give members autonomy approaching this extreme which still allows
cooperation and harmony.
The most successful organizations choose a hybrid of centralization and decentraliza-
tion which maximizes the strengths of each.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

16 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
Dimensions of decentralization
Networks can be decentralized along many independent dimensions.5 For example:
Location decentralization
Wikipedia’s network of editors who may occupy any geographical location in any
country with an internet connection. At the other extreme a classical corporation
might require all employees work in the same building. (See Figure m.)
Location
decentralized
Facebook users German citizens Your family
English Wikipedia North Korean You
users citizens
Location
centralized
Figure 6: Spectrum of location decentralization
Control decentralization
Political power, computational power, wealth, fame, etc. As of bcbc, Wikipedia still
has an ultimate arbiter in its founder Jimmy Wales and so is not completely decen-
tralized politically. The English language, on the other hand, evolves without any ulti-
mate authority on what new words can be added. Theoretically, anyone can invent a
new English word, so it is completely politically decentralized. (See Figure d.)
Power
decentralized
English
Language
(every speaker USA Vatican
may invent a Two parties One person
word) EU dominate rules for life
UN Germany PRC North Korea/
>7 parties One party rules Saudi Arabia
share control One family
rules eternally
Power
centralized
Figure 7: Spectrum of power decentralization
(cid:0)(cid:0)
5 Cf., Vitalik Buterin, “The Meaning of Decentralization”, Medium.com, Feb [, \]^_
https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/the-meaning-of-decentralization-a]cb\b_[a\_c Retrieved
e/^]/\]\].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 17
Protocol decentralization
Is there a set of rules that everyone in the network submits to? Do all members fol-
low the same logic and believe the same history? Almost every democracy in the
West follows a set of laws more clearly specified than that of supposedly autocratic
China, which has no formal constitution; its regular Five Year Plans are actually ab-
stract aspirations for the country that each province interprets as best they can. Al-
ternately, the French language has more rigid rules than English, so French is more
protocol centralized than English. On the other hand, the French legal system is less
formal than the British—French judges are less restricted by precedent and statute.
Black market organizations can fall anywhere on the spectrum, but typically have
much less formality in their rules than the English language does. Generally, at least
some level of protocol centralization is required for group harmony and efficiency.
We think of power decentralization as independent of protocol decentralization, but
power determines how protocol is amended and enforced. (See Figure e.)
Protocol
decentralized Prototocol
centralized
YouTube
comment Children's Classical ballet
section playground performance
Combat in the Football game
Roman
Colosseum
Figure 8: Spectrum of protocol decentralization
We can further characterize most any quality along a (de)centralization spectrum.
Centralized just means concentrated; decentralized means spread out. Events can be
centralized or decentralized in time. Colors can be more or less spread out along the
light spectrum: a rainbow is color decentralized; a laser is color centralized. The ide-
als of a community can be focused or vague.
Spiritual ideals decentralization
Peoples’ beliefs may be more strictly focused or loose. For example, the Jewish reli-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

18 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
gious belief spectrum ranges from ideologically rigid (centralized) to loose (decen-
tralized) is illustrated in Figure s.
Cultural
Liberal
Conservative
Orthodox
Karaites
Figure e: Spectrum of Judaic ideological adherence
This oversimplified characterization presents the categories from more decentralized
to more centralized as:
Cultural Jews — Identify with the culture and history of Jewish people, but not re-
quired to believe in any particular traditional religious tenet, nor follow any specific
strictures.
Reform/Liberal Jews – Go to synagogue occasionally; believe in the general outline
of the religious tenets but allow for alternate interpretations.
Conservative Jews – “Torah was inspired by G.d.” Laws strictly observed.
Orthodox Jews – “Torah was written by G.d.”
Karaite Jews— Respect only the written Torah with strict fundamentalist interpre-
tation. Reject commentary such as Midrash or Talmud.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 19
Figure gc: Extreme location decentraliza- Figure gg: Extreme location centrali-
tion zation
Abstractly, centralized means concentrated. Decentralization means spread out.
Qualities of decentralization: stability, efficiency, versatility
From the abstract perspective illustrated in Figures s & m we see the fundamental
qualities that determine the importance of centralization vs. decentralization in any
application.
Decentralization is stable. Centralization is unstable.
A highly concentrated object, or a structure with a great deal of complicated order,
has much more potential to be destabilized. Little changes can result in major struc-
tural change. On the other hand, if you disturb something that is extremely spread
out, it’s still spread out. The more concentrated a structure is, the more unstable it
is. The more spread out a pattern is, the more stable it is—like a stool with one cen-
tral leg versus the more stable arrangement of many legs spread out.
Decentralization is versatile. Centralization is task optimized.
Given a specific task, centralized organizations are more effective at the task they
are designed for than decentralized organizations. Getting a centralized group to
move in a single direction takes much less effort. An optimally centralized structure
would have no redundancy. So centralized organizations are more efficient at solving
their singular problem. Decentralization is less effective; it generally takes longer to
find the right components within its network which can solve the problem. The more
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

20 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
decentralized an organization, the more redundant it usually is. A decentralized or-
ganization is less efficient at solving a singular task. Communicating with and con-
vincing each autonomous member of a decentralized group is very energetically in-
tensive—"herding cats”.
However, decentralized organizations are more versatile. If you ask the BMW Motor-
rad company to make a new type of motorcycle, they could obviously complete the
job much more efficiently and effectively than Wikipedia. But if you want to find a
cure for a disease, invent a new type of fusion cuisine, or host a diplomatic summit
between African nations, then which group would fare better? Neither Motorrad nor
Wikipedia are designed to solve those problems. But the centralized Motorrad or-
ganization would waste a lot more resources and probably produce inferior results
to Wikipedia’s. Wikipedia could tap the potential of its diverse members, harnessing
the information at the edge, to identify the appropriate talent to solve a novel prob-
lem. It is reasonable to assume BMW’s members are not less talented than the aver-
age Wikipedia contributor. But the BMW hierarchy would be an obstacle to recogniz-
ing which of the many ideas the group might propose to solve the novel problem is
best. The hierarchy would prevent the identification of talented people if they occur
at the lower rungs. And it would resist any changes needed to construct a new hier-
archy for organizing the effort. Since Tesla Motors is facing dynamic challenges with
inventing new technology and production processes, they have consciously chosen
to decentralize many aspects of their organization in order to maximize their versa-
tility, so they can respond rapidly and efficiently to innovations and disruptions.
Decentralization is Efficient - Centralization is Inefficient
From a wider perspective, decentralization is efficient; centralization is inefficient. In
any market, centralization is dangerous. Monopolies ruin the efficiency of a mar-
ket—they impair its liquidity. The most efficient markets, the most liquid markets,
have high transaction rates of many goods moving between many small players. De-
centralization makes truth discovery more accurate, more reliable, and more effi-
cient. Think of the difference between gc competing news media companies report-
ing on a story versus g news company reporting gc times. Or a physics experiment
where a single researcher measures the speed of light gc times with the same instru-
ment versus gc different researchers using gc different instruments. Averaging the
results is much more accurate when there are diverse contributors. This spawns the
phrase, “the wisdom of the crowd”. Decentralization is both stable and efficient.
Ever since the writings of gdth century Scottish philosopher Adam Smith, it has been
recognized that decentralization makes the wider economy more efficient.
The goal of every organization is to be effective, efficient, and versatile. Organiza-
tions select different dimensions around which they are centralized or decentralized.
Corporations tend to have centralized power, because they wish to employ a singu-
lar strategy to efficiently exploit the circumstances of the market. However, this
leads to instability whenever the market swings. A brittle hierarchy may crash before
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

Preface – Two Pespectives (cid:0) 21
it can reorganize to effectively handle a new challenge. Decentralized organizations
don’t suffer swings in the market. A sufficiently decentralized organization is the
market.
Why and how?
When is decentralization preferable to centralization? Why have we recently been
hearing about decentralization more and more? What has changed technologically
to allow decentralization to outcompete centralization? How can we decentralize
our institutions, and why would we wish to?
In this book we will discuss centralized and decentralized organization in the past,
present, and future. We will see how these notions have affected society throughout
history, using the examples of Ancient Egypt and China to see how stability was
maintained with protocol decentralization in the justice system. We will see how the
Apaches used political decentralization to withstand successive empires devoted to
their downfall. We will explore how a decentralized group of Jewish traders thrived
thousands of miles apart along the dangerous and chaotic Silk Road a thousand years
ago with minimal information technology tools. We will analyze how gdth century
Western democratic governmental designs united nations of people into decentral-
ized organizations. Using these historical examples, we can understand success and
failure of organizations in the present, and how these ideas can predict the course of
business and culture in the future.
We will explore the power of decentralization unleashed by leaps in computational
power, information storage, internet communication, and cryptographic security.
Decentralized power was leveraged recently by centralized corporations like Face-
book and Google and Alibaba, making them the most powerful companies in the
world. Peer-to-peer technologies such as blockchain and distributed hash tables are
being used to decentralize power further. Smartphones are empowering individuals
worldwide with equalizing computation and communication power. The open source
programming movement is fostering a culture of transparency which results in tangi-
ble technological progress through meaningful cooperation, fulfilling the promise of
democracy, while increasing security.6 Using the power of decentralization, we can
create institutions that will bring harmony and stability to the new global society
that is emerging. Designed wisely, such institutions will protect individual rights and
empower us to cooperate for the benefit of all.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
6 Cf., Linus’ law, “Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow”, named after Linus Torvalds, the inventor
of the open source operating system, Linux, coined by Eric S. Raymond, The Cathedral and the Bazaar:
Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary, O'Reilly Media, ^bbb.
.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

22 (cid:0) Preface – Two Perspectives
Bibliography
Formating example:
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782191

