Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization 1
Contemporary Decentralization
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
Chapter ) highlights the transition from Web ).5 companies, such as Google, Fa-
cebook, and Uber, among many others, which have disrupted much of the economy,
to more decentralized solutions. Consumers around the globe are becoming increas-
ingly accustomed to the advantages of decentralized business. Improvements in peer-
to-peer technology may over time remove the centralized owners of these Web ).5
companies. Bitcoin serves as an example of a measurably valuable network with a
thoroughly decentralized ownership structure. The chapter evaluates how existing
shortcomings in open source technology and webG DApps for decentralized autono-
mous organizations, among others, can be addressed to help humanity benefit from
the decentralized technology evolution.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Chapter 5. Contemporary Decentralization
Web ).5 started when companies exploited the power of decentralization using
the tools of personal computers and the internet. Web ).5 began around KLLL with
companies like Google, Amazon, and Wikipedia taking advantage of previously un-
tapped talent and knowledge. Wikipedia decentralizes knowledge collection and or-
ganization; PayPal decentralizes payment services; Skype decentralizes telecommuni-
cations; Spotify decentralizes file sharing; Google Maps decentralizes data collection
for knowledge about road traffic, just as the Google search engine decentralizes data
collection for knowledge about website popularity by monitoring internet traffic;
YouTube decentralizes video production, putting a television studio in the pocket of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

2 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
anyone with a smartphone. Marketplaces of all kinds were decentralized by eBay, Am-
azon, Craig’s List, Airbnb, Upwork, and Uber. With the power of contemporary infor-
mation technology and intuitive UI design, these idiot-proof applications allow chil-
dren to do jobs that formerly required long training and substantial material
investment to achieve.
Intuitive user interfaces rely on the IT advance of dynamic processing. JavaScript
was a revolution that allowed intuitive and interactive functionality for Web ).5, com-
pared with the relatively static information storage and transmission that Web K.5
provided with HTML and CSS programming languages. This empowers everyone to be
content creators. Web ).5 companies connect billions of these newly empowered in-
dividuals with light speed broadcasting. The resulting cooperation leads to knowledge
beyond previous imagination. The decentralized interconnectivity of the web offers
up this Olympian perspective to everyone on the web, further magnifying our power.
By loosely curating and controlling this content with automated protocols, these com-
panies charge fees, advertise, direct our attention, request donations, and use the
knowledge of the network for market advantage. Since these profits are derived from
global networks, their potential is literally titanic.
Decentralization is upon us. We are already experiencing the advantage of decen-
tralization in most areas of our lives. The internet has given us the tools to decentralize
economics, education, and entertainment. With an algorithm, YouTube automates
the process of allowing anyone with a smartphone to create and share education and
entertainment content with the world. PayPal allows globally networked peer-to-peer
financial transactions. eBay and Amazon and Alibaba have algorithms that automate
globally networked peer-to-peer trading contracts. Uber’s algorithm automates the
connection of riders and drivers, unlocking the working potential of anyone with a car
and a smartphone. UpWork and TaskRabbit decentralize more of the gig economy,
allowing anyone with any skill to match directly with customers and employers. Face-
book’s algorithm facilitates social connections around the globe. Google Maps and
search engine utilizes the decentralized information from user traffic to feed algo-
rithms that automate the directions and commercial decisions of its users. Wikipedia’s
algorithm facilitates knowledge creation and sharing1, along with YouTube, which are
the most important tools for learning new skills in any endeavor, from life hacks and
cooking to computer programming and graduate-level physics subjects. Decentralized
tools are transforming the way people behave in every level of society, in every facet
of our lives.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 Intellipedia https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intellipedia (retrieved ?/?/)@) is an example of decentral-
ized knowledge creation and sharing behind a strong KYC private firewall that the US intelligence com-
munity has used for more than a decade.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 3
With the launch of the iPhone in )55[, smartphone adoption rates exceeded
other technological devices such as the lightbulb, telephones, TV, and the personal
computer. The smartphone became the consumer technology with the fastest adop-
tion rate, reaching ]5% market saturation in just two and a half years. The role of
smartphones for societal change cannot be underestimated. For the unbanked, who
lack access to traditional bank accounts, but have high rates of mobile phone owner-
ship, smartphones and mobile money are playing a critical role in financial inclusion.
The smartphone provides access to stored value accounts and a growing set of finan-
cial services that can change lives. The Arab Spring of )5KK or the protests following
the killing George Floyd in )5)5 sparked global changes because of the power of social
media. Common citizens are now journalists and have the power of news broadcast
rooms in their pockets. Average people are able to connect to more viewers than ma-
jor media corporations could two decades ago thanks to social media platforms such
as Facebook and Twitter.
From Social Media to Decentralized Coordination
Social media transfers knowledge from the edges of society into the mainstream.
Social media allows people who hold otherwise marginalized or underappreciated
views to meet kindred spirits online and form groups that broadcast and promote their
shared ideas. When these newly formed social networks grow they can increase their
influence and promote their perspectives until they gain mainstream adoption. Oth-
erwise invisible social, ethical, environmental, and political issues can thus gain trac-
tion. Increased visibility of these issues can transfer the balance of power from the
few to the many. Power is diffused—decentralized.
Facebook is widely credited with beginning the Arab Spring uprisings that led to
massive political protests throughout North Africa and the Middle East starting in )5KK
and revolutions in Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, and Yemen.2 How did Facebook know which
stories were important to promote in its network? Did some nameless employee come
across an important incident and spread it around the network? Not at all. The cen-
tralized company Facebook didn’t know or choose to do anything directly related to
the beginnings of the protest. The platform was used as a tool of protestors and rev-
olutionaries to communicate their messages of dissatisfaction. “It allows them to cir-
cumvent state-controlled media. What we’ve seen in the Arab Spring in the use of
Twitter, YouTube, Facebook, all of these things, […] what it allowed protestors to do
(cid:0)(cid:0)
2 Roger P. Mellen, “Modern Arab uprisings and social media: An historical perspective on media and
revolution”, Explorations in Media Ecology, Vol. SS Issue ), p SST (April )@SU)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

4 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
was to circumvent these dictatorships, their traditional means of controlling infor-
mation, which was the state television network, the state radio, the state newspa-
pers.”3
How do the protestors use social media to organized their protests? In the subse-
quent global Occupy protests, in the Hong Kong protests, the George Floyd protests
and many others, protests have not been centrally controlled. There is no president
of the Hong Kong protests. Neither do the companies who own and run these social
media platforms guide the movements. They don’t know what the stories are that will
spark revolution. Yet stories do go viral and change the world.
How does Facebook know to tell its users the most important news stories of the
day? How does Twitter know the best new cat video? How does Netflix know the top
K5 comedy movies of the KLL5s? How does Google know what the best Thai restaurant
in Rome is? Quite simply, they don’t. The companies don’t go out and answer these
questions all day every day for themselves and then share it with you. The network
itself knows these answers. The network of users has the answers in their members’
behavior. The social media companies simply monitor the networks’ transactions and
statistically analyze the information with automated algorithms. Information at the
edge is gleaned mathematically using our new information technology.
As the broadest extension of technological decentralization, the internet era gave
rise to the most significant societal decentralization. Communication and commerce
were freed of geographic limitations. At the beginning of the )5)5s, about one fourth
of humanity engages in virtual communication on social media in some capacity. Social
media created a form of social cohesion that was unprecedented in terms of geo-
graphic social interaction. Views and values could be exchanged and influenced with
an unprecedented geographic reach. Prior marginalized groups can coordinate their
efforts worldwide through online groups that promote their shared ideas. Social func-
tions that formerly belonged to local groups were increasingly being fulfilled by social
media exchanges where influence is allocated to the most popular content and its cre-
ator.
Societal boundaries are continuously being shifted via internet-based knowledge
exchange and social media. In the pre-internet era, knowledge was mostly accumu-
lated by and exchanged with specialists. Internet-based knowledge sharing helps re-
move information silos and information privileges that created societal structures and
privileges. With the dawn of the social media age, the level of interaction between
(cid:0)(cid:0)
3 CNN's Ivan Watson during a )@S) South by Southwest discussion.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SbSj\f]f^Eg&desktop_uri=%)Fwatch%UFv%UDSbSj\f]f^Eg (Re-
trieved ^/S)/)@).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 5
non-specialists has increased dramatically, removing hegemony and centralized con-
trol structures over information while creating a more skilled and knowledgeable work
force. For example, micro task work via Crowdflower and Amazon Mechanical Turk
enable lower skilled or unemployed individuals to earn a living through micro task
work over the internet. Recruitment for such work typically takes place over social
media outlets, that is by word of mouth on social media channels.
Internet-based collective decision-making via the crowd can replace the central-
ized coordination functions in society. For example, in the past, product quality as-
sessments were centrally disseminated and evaluated on consumer’s behalf, by way
of Consumer Reports, among others. In the social media age, collective decision-mak-
ing through the power of the crowd is perhaps the most prevailing method of product
evaluation and forces companies to take heed. Similarly, knowledge and views from
the edges of society can be moved into societal mainstream very quickly via social
media. This transfer can remove existing societal consensus, social cohesion among
established groups, and order in the process. Otherwise less visible and influential so-
cial, ethical, environmental, political issues can thus gain traction rather quickly. Tra-
ditional modes of coordinating human behavior by way of political decision making,
democratic institutions, business governance, learning, among many others, become
slowly less prevalent.
The increased network capability of society that is promoted by social media can
change and improve the coordination of human behavior in society. Social media data
and metrics can replace centralized coordination of human behavior. For example, so-
cial media posts often identify emergency information more accurately with more
timely dissemination than centralized media reports. Similarly, for groups that coordi-
nate their conduct, as for example in the Arab Spring and other reform movements,
coordination via social media is not merely relegated to information exchange, but
can actually coordinate protest movements. In the product context, social media con-
duct of groups as they relate to products becomes a very powerful placement and
marketing device. Product specific or content specific conduct on social media can be-
come a form of ‘social proof’ for such products or services. However, because the
incentive design for social proof is suboptimal, the social media coordination function
is still largely flawed and corruptible. For example, one of the first things that will hap-
pen if you open a shop on Amazon is that you will receive several messages from ma-
licious sock-puppet wranglers offering to game the rating system to improve your
company’s ratings while attacking your major competitor.
Decentralized technology solutions are starting to tap into the coordination func-
tion that was inaugurated by social media, while also improving it with new tools. So-
cial media allows the enhanced coordination of information that was previously iso-
lated on the edges of society. Because social networks feed off interactions among
people, they become exponentially more powerful as they grow, due to the network
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

6 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
effect. But these networks are stifled by the centralized ownership and governance of
the Web ).5 companies that run them. Governing decentralized information flow ne-
cessitates decentralized incentive designs.
Societal decentralization is a byproduct of broader societal trends that derive
from the combined feedback effects of decentralization of science, technological de-
centralization, organizational decentralization, as well as market and governmental
decentralization. Such are the precursors of an ever freer and more open society. Cen-
tralized ownership and control of the Web ).5 information filtering algorithms can be
useful to prevent users from gaming the system. By keeping their algorithm opaque it
is more difficult for outside interests to exploit the way these social media companies
guide their users to information. The Google search engine algorithm is constantly be-
ing improved, because website developers infer the rules of the algorithm and exploit
its properties to raise their site’s ranking. For example, if you wanted to sell widgets
on your website in )55m, you could make a blue background and type “widget” in the
same blue color thousands of times. The )55m Google search engine algorithm (Pag-
eRank) would then raise your website’s relevance in any person’s search for “widget”.
The )55[ algorithm saw through this trick and would punish any page that used it. So
website developers moved on to other tricks in )55p.
But a different incentive mechanism can improve the algorithms even faster. In-
stead of an arms race between the outside exploiters and the centralized companies
who host the network, if the P)P network were decentrally owned by the users them-
selves, the algorithms can be open source and still remain safe. Instead of a centralized
company continually developing the opaque algorithm to punish people who try to
optimize their content, P)P networks can reward members properly for improving the
algorithm. By rewarding users for policing exploitation, by incentivizing the network
to defend the algorithm they own, these decentralized networks leverage the power
of a much larger talent pool. Instead of having few insiders and many outsiders, open
access flips the ownership model, creating as many insiders as can possibly contribute.
This flipping of ownership of Web ).5 companies to a decentralized ownership model
is the heart of the WebG movement we will discuss later.
Page and Brin deserve to be lauded and rewarded for inventing the PageRank al-
gorithm that underlied the early Google search engine. But the primitive system for
recognizing only the ultimate legal winners, the Jobs’s and Gates’s, is being improved.
The next Pages and Brins will certainly be recognized and rewarded under this new
model of ownership, but the army of developers who further improve the systems will
also get their due.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 7
Sharing Economy
Peer-to-peer connectivity is giving new life to the sharing economy. The sharing
economy refers to the utilization of previously idle services and goods and the partial
use of others’ property rights in goods. For instance, you might provide your car, or
your time, as part of a peer-to-peer transaction, often over a platform built to unite
the interested parties. Unlike traditional centralized ways of production and selling to
consumers by hiring employees, platform companies in the sharing economy typically
provide the technological setup that allows individuals to share their property rights
in goods or sell their services without centralized employment. Individuals who con-
nect via platforms in the sharing economy share their property rights in, for example,
cars, homes, or rent out their personal skillsets and time in a peer-to-peer form of
engagement.
The sharing economy has become part of modern society’s mainstream. The ori-
gins of the sharing economy can be traced back to an emphasis on sustainability, re-
source efficiency, and community. As the sharing economy evolved, not only did its
services and industry acceptance proliferate, the sharing economy’s credo of “access
over ownership” became more mainstream. The public had grown accustomed to re-
ceiving services and goods on-demand via digital and mobile technologies—especially
the perception of the internet as universal access to information. On-demand access
to goods and services became part of modern society, it became no longer a prefer-
ence and habit of millennials alone.
The sharing economy necessitates a reframing of legacy legal regimes and frame-
works. The legal frameworks that regulate disrupted and associated industries are of-
ten incompatible with the emerging trends generated by the sharing economy. Cities
and co-municipalities had to learn that the sharing economy requires a proactive
stance to channel the sharing economy’s outputs and associated new requirements
into economic development while at the same time protecting the public with regula-
tion. While some cities have joined forces to declare common commitments and prin-
ciples for sharing cities4 and many co-municipalities are developing transportation-as-
a-service platforms to better meet the needs of all residents, some states in the United
States have passed legislation that in some ways undermine the sharing economy.5
(cid:0)(cid:0)
4 Share Barcelona, https://share.barcelona/ (accessed June S, )@)@).
5 Ballotpedia ()@Sf). Local Government Responses to the Sharing Economy (ridesharing/homesharing),
https://ballotpedia.org/Local_government_responses_to_the_sharing_economy_(rideshar-
ing/homesharing) (accessed June S, )@)@); Chapman, Lizette, Eidelson, Josh, Cutler, Joyce E. & Bloom-
berg (Sept. SS, )@S]). Governmental requirements that Uber & Lift treat their workers as employees
instead of independent contractors will certainly weaken the power the company receives from their
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

8 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
Yet, some countries, such as Denmark, have changed their internal regulations to bet-
ter accommodate sharing economies.
The values that enabled the new flowering of the sharing economy morphed from
an emphasis on connectivity for the sake of sustainability to a focus on connectivity
and community as a commodity. In other words, connectivity and community building
via increased connectivity became a purpose and meaning by itself. The purpose of
sharing economy participants shifted from connectivity for a cause, such as a commu-
nity for sustainability, toward mass consumption for convenience and transactional
efficiency.
The ultimate sign of the sharing economy’s success is its increasing recognition in
policy, economic, and business circles, as part of the overall economy. The sharing
economy has the potential to shape entire markets that are better connected and
more efficient. It has started to blur the lines between industries and even former
competitors.
How did we get here, and where are we going?
History of Web <.> and Web ?.>
In harnessing the power and talent of the masses, one of the problems that Web
).5 companies solved was the problem of individual success under Web K.5. Ulti-
mately, internet users made a Faustian bargain with Web ).5 companies to host their
content.
In the early days of Web K.5 if you wanted to post content, you would build your
own webpage. Then you could buy a special router to connect your computer to the
internet after obtaining special addresses (IP and AS numbers) and permissions from
the King of the Internet.6 Then you would need to keep your computer server running
(cid:0)(cid:0)
decentralized structure. However, this may improve the industry, as it opens the space for more po-
litically decentralized competitors. A DAO which makes each member a partial owner would not be
subject to the bill since such a DAO would not have employers and employees. “New Labor Bill Passed
by California Senate Would Transform the Gig Economy -- And Could Cost Uber nT@@ Million a Year”,
Fortune: Tech, https://fortune.com/)@S]/@]/SS/gig-economy-california-senate-uber-law-labor-
rights-union/ (accessed June S, )@)@).
6 That’s an old joke about the World Wide Web. Who is the ultimate person in charge of the internet,
anyway? Somebody called me a bad name. Can I talk to the manager? The web was designed to be
censorship resistant with maximum autonomy amongst nodes. This brought about a new level of free-
dom of speech that is clashing with our evolutionary programming. From the beginnings of multicel-
lular life, if one animal were to insult another, the response would be immediate and symmetric. On
the internet, a troll can flame and run.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 9
and your telephone lines open, so that anyone who wanted to view your webpage
could contact your computer and ask it to send the information.
This was not a problem in the early days when very few people were using the
internet. But the network quickly grew, so if your webpage was at all popular, this
setup would create a bottleneck. The solution at the time was to hire a middleman.
These functions could be achieved by internet service providers (ISPs)7 who could pro-
vide the bandwidth necessary to allow your page to be seen by the world.
The idea at the time was that ISPs would compete to become powerful utilities,
since they would provide essential services for the commons. They would provide as
much bandwidth as possible to their users to justify their expansion. The incentive
structure that would solve the problem is for originators of TCP requests8 to pay the
bill. That way ISPs who hosted more content would be paid from the ISPs who hosted
more consumers.
This didn’t solve the problem, as naturally the Tragedy of the Commons9 asserted
itself. Porn sites and pirated file sharing (often set up by the ISPs themselves to game
the payment design10) quickly used up any available bandwidth. Further, negotiations
between ISP providers were much more nuanced than the plan outlined above; the
accounting didn’t merely resolve according to TCP requests. Creators concerned with
fringe issues, such as science and social issues, were not a priority and could be
charged, since they cared about their causes. The ISP charged low-volume providers
on a per connection basis. If your site suddenly became popular, with thousands of
people constantly accessing your content, you had to pay for thousands of long-dis-
tance phone calls. Individuals with popular pages were forced to delete their content.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
7 Previously, there were many independent ISPs, culminating in approximately f@@@ ISPs in the US by
)@@@. Within a few years, however, the ISPs were consolidated until U.S. internet telecommunications
became dominated by two companies, Comcast and AT&T. https://www.sa-
catech.com/)@S]/@^/ST/neverending-story-isp-market-consolidation/ Posted August )@S]. (Retrieved
?/U/)@.)
8 Transmission Control Protocol is the primary set of rules governing the proper format for transmis-
sion of website information, email, and other files through the internet. A common TCP request is to
view the information at any given website address.
9 The Tragedy of the Commons refers to the reasonable and predictable situation where a shared re-
source is spoiled without oversight or accountability. The idea was mentioned early by the British
economist William Forster Lloyd (“Two Lectures on the Checks to Population”, Oxford University, S^UU)
who described unregulated grazing on public land—the commons—and it is commonly used to explain
the collapse of fisheries and other environmental problems. Here the “commons” is the shared public
resource of internet bandwidth, or even the unmeasurable tone of our culture which still has mean-
ingful economic consequences.
10 Viktor Trón, Aron Fischer, Dániel Nagy, Zsolt Felföldi, & Nick Johnson, “Swap, Swear and Swindle:
Incentive System for Swarm”, Ethersphere Orange Papers, p. \, draft version May )@S?.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

10 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
Web ).5. companies provided the solution. YouTube, Facebook, and Reddit pro-
vide free hosting for your text, picture, and movie files. In exchange they have access
to the information that content providers want to share. They own any personal in-
formation from viewers that can be gleaned. They control what content can and can’t
be shared, guiding popular opinion. And most importantly they have access to our
attention.
Each of these Web ).5 companies has disrupted their in-
dustries in dramatic ways. But these examples all use a central-
ized hierarchical business model for ownership and governance
of information. For example, internet-based markets—like
Craig’s List, eBay and Amazon—are hybrid centralized compa-
nies that decentralize the customer experience, since anyone
can be a vendor and anyone can be a reviewer. Buyers and
sellers are directly connected. The internet allows their plat-
forms to scale globally. More users means exponentially more
connections11—the network effect means the leap in connec-
tions matches customers more efficiently with vendors, in-
creasing sales and efficiency.
Intuitive user interfaces—idiot-proof design—help maxim-
ize the size of the network. Ride-sharing businesses, like Uber,
take advantage of this increased efficiency by providing free
apps that anyone can use to engage business, connecting a
rider with an available driver with a few clicks. The centralized
owners control this software and therefore control the market
and can dictate prices. They don’t charge transparent fees. They
adjust to real-time information about supply and demand to
maximize their profits. If there are many riders demanding rides
during rush hour they can increase fees. If there are too many
(cid:0)(cid:0)
11 The exponent is ), so a pedantic mathematician might object that it’s quadratic growth. The idea is
that with 𝑛 nodes in a network, there are 𝑛C#=𝑛(𝑛−’)/#~!𝑛" possible connections. The network
"
effect of power scaling as the square of the number of members of the network has been in common
scientific parlance since at least the S]^@s and is sometimes referred to as Metcalfe’s Law
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe%)fs_law (Retrieved ^/S)/)@).
Compare this with the number of connections in a centralized hierarchical structure. In a tree graph
with 𝑛 nodes there are 𝑛−’ connections regardless of the number of levels in the hierarchy, the
minimal number necessary to make the graph globally connected. The centralized structure is maxi-
mally efficient for sending messages to the whole group from one central leader using minimal energy.
For instance, the Catholic religious hierarchy uses f levels to create the potential to reach every person
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 11
drivers they can pay them less. These Web ).5 companies use the structure, control,
and profit optimization of centralized companies combined with the power of decen-
tralization due to network effects.
Thanks to these Web ).5 companies, which have disrupted much of the economy,
consumers around the globe are becoming accustomed to the advantages of decen-
tralized business. But improvements in peer-to-peer (P)P) technology are prompting
the question of whether the centralized owners of these Web ).5 companies are nec-
essary at all. We now have the technology to decentralize these companies com-
pletely. Bitcoin is an example of a measurably Figure 1: Network effects
valuable network with a thoroughly decentral- ** Woody993 published under the Crea-
ized ownership structure. tive Commons CC0 1.0 Universal Pub-
lic Domain Dedication.
https://commons.wiki-
media.org/wiki/File:Metcalfe-Network-Effect.svg
Open source culture
In order to have a truly decentralized organization, the rules must be transpar-
ently available to all members. Otherwise the keepers of the knowledge have a higher
status, creating a hierarchy. Further, all members must be encouraged to contribute
to these rules, according to their talents. Transparency is fundamental to fostering the
trust between members necessary to build a decentralized network. The functions of
all software must be publicly auditable for people to trust it. If one person could own
the copyright to some of the software a decentralized organization uses, then they
would have de facto power over the organization, again establishing hierarchies of
power within the organization. We wouldn’t be talking about the decentralized organ-
izations of the future without open source software. The open source movement has
already transformed our world.
A fundamental divide exists at the heart of computer programming regarding the
copyrightability of software. At the beginnings of electronic computing, researchers in
universities and technology companies came from a tradition of freely sharing their
work in service to their field’s progress. This openness in academia can be traced at
(cid:0)(cid:0)
on the planet. Hypothetically, if the Pope contacted ’++=’+" cardinals, who each contacted ’+" arch-
bishops, and so on down through bishops, priests, deacons, and lay people, then the Pope would have
potential access to ’+!"=’ trillion individuals requiring only , levels.
The maximally decentralized structure, on the other hand, is maximally stable in that it is maximally
redundant and will not suffer any loss in connectivity when any particular connection is broken. With
the contemporary advances in information technology, we live in a post-information-scarcity society
and do not need to rely on the efficiency saving architectures of centralized hierarchies. Now every
individual can broadcast their messages to every other individual on the planet inexpensively.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

12 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
least to the Renaissance, but all societies’ golden ages are characterized by a flourish-
ing of innovation which can be directly attributed to temporary open collaboration in
their culture. Early computer programs were basic algorithms—they were closer to
mathematics proofs than to fictional works of literature and were simply seen as ele-
gant distillations of clear thought that anyone would come to, given sufficient time
and effort. In the KLx5s-m5s most computer companies did not license their operating
systems. As programs became more complex, companies began to view their software
as intellectual property. In KL[m the U.S. Congress updated the Copyright Act of KL5L,
and based on the recommendations of the National Commission on New Technologi-
cal Uses of Copyrighted Works (CONTU), wrote an amendment in KLp5 clarifying soft-
ware as creative art, similar to literature and copyrightable in any form.12
Software companies such as Microsoft, IBM, and AT&T began to enforce their
copyrights with license fees and no longer distributed source code.13 Richard Stallman
is a major voice in the open source movement who decried these practices as unethi-
cal and stultifying to the field of software development, by limiting the ability to build
on others’ work. Advocating the use of “free” software (“free as in ‘freedom’, not as
in ‘free beer’”14), Stallman created the GNU Project in KLpG which was formalized in
the non-profit Free Software Foundation in KLpx. Their GNU General Public License
(KLpL) implemented the copyleft legal mechanism which grants users the rights to use
purchased software without further charges, and the rights to modify the program's
source code, but requires all future derivatives to remain under the same license.
Linus Torvalds released his Linux operating system (OS) under the GNU license in
KLL) which has become the most common operating system running unnoticed in
most mobile phones. Linux has more than Kx55 developers15. The crypto community
boasts anywhere from ]555 to )55,555 developers per month. These figures are
completely unreliable due to anonymity (especially due to the uncertain legal environ-
ment) and the fact that very few of this number work on stable projects. Ethereum
likely has the largest community with approximately )55 full-time developers.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
12 Jan L. Nussbaum, “Apple Computer, Inc. v. Franklin Computer Corporation Puts the Byte Back into
Copyright Protection for Computer Programs”, Golden Gate University Law Review Volume S\, Issue
), Article U (January S]^\) pp )f^—)]).
13 Steven Weber, The Success of Open Source, Harvard University Press, pp U^–\\ ()@@\). More details
on most of the history in this section is reviewed in https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/His-
tory_of_free_and_open-source_software (Retrieved f/US/)@)
14 Sam Williams, Free as in Freedom: Richard Stallman's Crusade for Free Software, O'Reilly Media,
()@@))
15 https://www.linuxfoundation.org/resources/open-source-guides/participating-open-source-com-
munities/ (Retrieved f/US/)@)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 13
The Apache HTTP Server software was the next major open source project, which
now underlies almost every click you make on the internet. It’s worth exploring the
history and operation of the largest stable open source programming community, the
Apache Software Foundation (ASF), with [p55 high-level developers, called commit-
ters. Today ASF has )5) active committees working on G]5 active projects.16 They are
responsible for the experience we have with the internet today, since every major
software company uses many of the tools Apache has built and released for free in
the last three decades. The network started in KLLG on a project that became the
Apache HTTP Server, which today is the world's most popular web server software.17
The name Apache was chosen partly to signal their affinity for the Native American
tribe’s indomitability and decentralized nature, and partly as a pun—their main con-
cern in the beginning was creating Apache software patches for internet products.
All work released by the foundation uses the Apache license, which is an anchor
of the current open source software (OSS) movement. The Apache license gives users
the legal right to use the software for any purpose, to distribute it, to modify it, even
to profit from it, without ever paying the Apache foundation. The Apache license dif-
fers from the GNU license in that new software deriving from work under the Apache
license is not required to remain under the Apache license. New work may be pa-
tented or copyright protected by its innovators. The only constraint is that the modi-
fied ASF file must be annotated carefully with a NOTICE text file explaining the
changes.
Some of the rate of technological innovation is due to the open source culture,
and it is especially important in the emerging API economy. The “API economy” is a
term that comes from a programming structure called an API, which stands for Appli-
cation to Program Interface. In software development an API is a metaphorical bridge
between two incompatible programs—the API is a third program that translates be-
tween the other two. The API economy is a recognition that the interoperability be-
tween many of the digital tools in our lives and in business is leading to great leaps in
efficiency, requiring complex new legal and business negotiations due to the near con-
tinual innovation in collaboration displayed in the use of these tools.
As an example, after working on my car, my mechanics texts me the diagnosis and
a bill. I choose from a list of recommended maintenance and fixes that I want them to
(cid:0)(cid:0)
16 apache.org (Retrieved July U@, )@)@)
17 See Netcraft (April ST, )@S@). April )@S@ Web Server Survey, https://news.netcraft.com/ar-
chives/)@S@/@\/ST/april_)@S@_web_server_survey.html (accessed June S, )@)@) for an external audit
and more recent claims in The Apache Software Foundation Annual Report for )@)@ Fiscal Year, The
Apache Software Foundation Blog (July )], )@)@) Available online at: https://blogs.apache.org/foun-
dation/entry/the-apache-software-foundation-announces?f (Retrieved f/US/)@)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

14 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
do, and I pay through my smart phone which stores my credit card and interacts with
the mechanics’ payment app to their bank account. This triggers the shipment of parts
to the mechanic, automatically paying the distributor and shipping service. There are
at least eight programs owned by eight different interests that are interacting in this
nearly trivial transaction, but they all need APIs to interact.
APIs create the standards that allow companies to exchange data and build seam-
less omnichannel experiences for their customers. Interoperability strengthens net-
works, making them more pervasive and useful, leading to greater adoption. Interop-
erability thus naturally increases network effects making them more valuable to
members and users.
As our systems become more interoperable, it will require more sophisticated
APIs which will require more access to the source code of each of the separate apps.
An open source culture accelerates this development. P)P technologies provide neu-
tral platforms for the API economy. The level playing field of decentralized technolo-
gies gives the ideal market for companies to negotiate and collaborate.
But how do we build powerful and valuable technological platforms that nobody
owns? Let’s first look to the Apache foundation to see how it has thrived in the last
few decades.
The ASF is a decentralized organization. Because of its nonprofit status, it can sur-
vive with a very loose governance process, dominated by a do-ocracy philosophy—
doing things is the primary governing force for the group. If people are interested in
working on a new project and are willing to uphold the organization’s values (following
their code of conduct), they are usually encouraged, because a primary value of the
network is to build community. Surprisingly, the major source of tension in the com-
munity is that some for-profit companies such as Facebook or Google will pay their
workers to contribute to projects they need. These workers often devote far more
effort to a project and sometimes push out volunteers. Then the paid workers leave
once their duties are complete, leaving no one to maintain and upgrade the software
in the future. The maxim "Community Over Code" is repeatedly used to promote the
idea that a good community can fix code problems, but a bad community cannot main-
tain even the best code in the long run.
Despite the looseness of the Apache do-ocracy, such strife necessitates some
foundational rules for arbitrating conflicts, such as whether a project is finished and
should be released under the Apache name. In such cases, there are [pK members who
may vote up +K, down -K, or abstain 5. If the sum of the votes are positive, the proposal
passes. There are three ranks of power in ASF: contributors, committers, and mem-
bers. Only the members can vote. You can become a member if another member nom-
inates you and the other members positively vote for your candidacy. Therefore, ASF
is technically a closed organization. But the ASF is also quite open, in the sense that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 15
anyone in the world can be a contributor on any project, in most any capacity. How-
ever, their contributions are only suggestions until they are approved by a committer.
Committers have the power of write access to their project repositories. Contributors
with a strong record of improving projects can become committers on a project if the
members in the project nominate and approve them.
How, though, can we explain the success of Apache? Why do people donate their
talents and efforts to valuable projects from which they receive no remuneration?
How do they maintain quality? How has the network survived for three decades? Re-
member, a decentralized network survives by living its values.
The members are happy to explain that their motivations include altruism, social
reputation, and belonging and contributing to a community. Owen O’Malley, the VP
of Apache Orc explains, “If everyone knows that I did a piece of code, then I’m a lot
more careful to make it good. And if it’s just something that is going into a proprietary
software, then I can be a little sloppier.”18 Members simply feel good about them-
selves and enjoy contributing to projects that they see improving the world. Making a
meaningful contribution to code that is used around the world is an impressive line on
your resume. But the most compelling argument we hear is Funktionslust. “When I
create something, I want it to be beautiful as well as functional.” The German word
Funktionslust means the pleasure you enjoy by doing something you’re good at. “We
also have to work with a lot of closed-source software, and it just sucks. It’s hard to
debug. It’s hard to reason about. With the ASF you work together with a bunch of
people who chose these products to collaborate.” The open source culture brings to-
gether talent from anywhere on the planet. Projects get populated with people who
want to work on that product—who are good at solving those problems. Mostly, it’s
fun. It’s fun to work together with other people who share your values, to use your
talents and improve yourself. It’s fun to teach and to learn, especially on a project you
care about. By acting as if they are living in a post-scarcity society, they create one.19
Andy Shi, a Developer Advocate for Alibaba, explains, “Joining forces with the open
source effort is rewarding. You give a little; you take back way more. So that’s really
what I want to share, especially with developers and companies in China. Don’t be
afraid to give, to share. You will get more out of it.”
(cid:0)(cid:0)
18 Quotes from the documentary feature Trillions and Trillions Served, The Apache Software Founda-
tion, Jun S@, )@)@. Available online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JUt)nb@mgwg&fea-
ture=youtu.be (Retrieved July US, )@)@)
19 Barbrook, Richard, "The High-Tech Gift Economy". First Monday. SU (S)), (S]]^ with )@@T update).
Available online at https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/?US/TT) (Retrieved
^/U/)@)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

16 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
Eric S. Raymond wrote the article “The Cathedral and the Bazaar” and organized
a committee which introduced the term open source (first suggested by Christine Pe-
terson) in KLLp.20 The “Cathedral” refers to centralized, carefully controlled, closed-
source development projects, while the “Bazaar” refers to the more chaotic, decen-
tralized, open-source projects. Both models have advantages and disadvantages.
Since before its publication, many major projects have switched repeatedly between
the two models, with Apache being perhaps the most visible and enduring success of
the Bazaar model.
For the last three decades, Apache HTTP has been the most popular server soft-
ware in the world. Google built the Android operating system on the backbone of Linux
under the open source Apache ).5 license. Android is the most popular mobile plat-
form worldwide. The popularity of these open source platforms is largely due to the
fact that independent developers have less legal confusion about what they can con-
tribute, control, and own in the open source environment.
These reasons bring us some of the way towards understanding how the open
source movement can exist. But how can they thrive? The Apache Software Founda-
tion’s near trivial governance system works in an organization whose members are
not competing for power and money within the organization. The Apache foundation
rightfully brags that their ))[ million lines of code have given the world a value of
US})5 billion.21 Impressive for a volunteer force seeking no monetary rewards, but
it’s a blip in the global economy. However, not all is positive in an environment with
maximal transparency. Sometimes open source projects fail to attract the necessary
quality of developer that a closed-source project can reliably procure with more fund-
ing and control. Another problem is that the very success of the open source move-
ment allows major corporations to pressure smaller projects to reveal their code, then
take it and use their power to exploit the work more profitably than the startup.
How can we improve such open decentralized networks? How can we properly
incentivize larger swaths of the economy to compete with for-profit centralized com-
panies? The Apache Foundation has built a successful non-profit software develop-
ment DAO. What tools do we need to build a for-profit software development DAO—
a Maghribi Foundation?
(cid:0)(cid:0)
20 Michael Tiemann, "History of the OSI", Open Source Initiative (S October )@@)). Available online at
https://web.archive.org/web/)@@)S@@SS?\@ST/http://www.opensource.org/docs/history.php (Re-
trieved f/US/)@).
21 The Apache Software Foundation Annual Report for )@)@ Fiscal Year, The Apache Software Founda-
tion Blog (July )], )@)@) Available online at: https://blogs.apache.org/foundation/entry/the-apache-
software-foundation-announces?f (Retrieved f/US/)@)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 17
Early peer-to-peer file-sharing programs demonstrated that the untapped band-
width available from individuals’ uploading capacity was enough to compete with
large ISPs. At one point, P)P networks accounted for a majority of internet traffic. The
bandwidth has always been there, but the latency of past P)P projects is higher than
people now demand—it took longer to receive the information from individual de-
vices which are not optimized for broadcast speed compared with dedicated servers.
New projects promise to address this problem with computation and storage sharing,
not just file sharing. Let’s look closer at P)P technology, and see how is it being used
to replace Web ).5 companies.
P?P, blockchains, and WebF
Technological innovation is rapidly accelerating. Hard on the heels of the com-
puter revolution that culminated in the Web K.5 internet, Web ).5 disrupted major
sectors of our economy by giving global networking power to any consumer. Intuitive
user interfaces (UIs) transform children into gods of information, whose abilities
would make Hermes blush. Using these UIs, companies are harnessing the previously
untapped talent, taking advantage of new wells of decentralized information.
Now less than two decades later, WebG hopes to furnish the next information
technology revolution. 22 This vision for the future is to fully decentralize every aspect
of IT with peer-to-peer technology (P)P). The goal of the WebG movement is to foster
radical bureaucratic transparency using open source design, to further individual au-
tonomy and privacy using cryptography, and to level the access to information and
computing resources with decentralized networks.
P-P technology
Most people are unaware of the many types of P)P technology that the internet
relies on, but we are more familiar with the somewhat analogous technology of cloud
computing. Cloud computing uses the internet to displace your storage and processing
of information from your personal device to a more powerful distant device. Dropbox
()55p), for example, is a privately-owned cloud storage company which allows you to
store your files (movies, pictures, documents) on their servers instead of your home
(cid:0)(cid:0)
22 The term WebU was first suggested by Gavin Wood, who was instrumental in the creation of
Ethereum. Web U.@ is also sometimes used to refer to Tim Berners-Lee’s notion of the semantic web,
which is unrelated.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

18 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
device, then access the files on-demand through the internet. The advantage is that
most people can trust a large company to back up their storage much more reliably
than they can personally, and the files will be available regardless of how technology
changes from floppy disks to CDs to flash drives etc.
Similarly, there are cloud computing architectures for displacing information pro-
cessing from your personal device to a distant computer.
Since your files are stored redundantly on many backup servers, we can say that
cloud computing decentralizes the function of your personal computer. But most
cloud computing is centralized in the sense that you need to rely on a centrally owned
company to provide the service. The disadvantage of centralization is losing power
over your personal information, paying for the privilege, and hoping the files stay se-
cure despite the reality of their centralized point of failure (if the company goes bank-
rupt or is hacked, for example). WebG is devoted to the challenge of creating decen-
tralized alternatives.
P)P is an alternative decentralized architecture to cloud computing. Napster was
an early decentralized P)P file sharing system (KLLL) which revolutionized how users
accessed music, completely disrupting the music distribution industry. Improving on
Napster, BitTorrent ()55K) protocols allow users to share files directly between each
other in a more fully peer-to-peer setting, without storing file content on any central-
ized server. The idea is that anyone running a client (software that runs the BitTorrent
algorithm) will be able to automatically share files from their computer (called seed-
ing), making them available to anyone who wishes to view those files and download
them. Large files are split into pieces and held redundantly on many different comput-
ers in the network to make them available on demand. So P)P architectures create
open decentralized networks, where every user starts on an equal footing.
The point of a P)P network is to achieve distributed computing without central-
ized control. Distributed computing is splitting a big difficult task across many mem-
bers as equally as possible. The goal is to unite a network of nodes (i.e., computers) all
running the same protocol and all sharing the work. A simple example of P)P is the
internet itself, where computers all over the world run the same protocol for com-
municating with each other and sharing data. Very roughly, the internet has a protocol
for keeping track of all the website addresses (called DNS) and users’ addresses (IPs,
ISPs, NSPs), and a protocol for connecting computers (HTTP, TCP IP) so they can re-
quest data or computations from each other.
Other P)P services use an even simpler architecture to link a network of users,
with the goal of bringing the technological requirements down to the level of the av-
erage individual’s laptop, as BitTorrent demonstrates. Another example, Tor ()55))
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 19
helps anonymize internet usage, protecting citizens’ and reporters’ access to commu-
nication under oppressive governments.23 Each user can participate anonymously to
build a cooperative network which provides greater value for all, at least theoretically.
The reason earlier centralized companies succeeded against more decentralized
P)P platforms is due to the existing technology of the time and the natural incentive
design that is built into our capitalist civilization. Commercial devices available to the
average user were not able to provide the upload speed that industrial servers with
“fat pipes” could, meaning greater latency for P)P platforms built from average indi-
vidual computer enthusiasts. Centralized companies had the proper incentive design
to provide better quality of experience by overseeing commercially-oriented intuitive
user interface upgrades. And large companies would find negotiating the central bu-
reaucracy more worthwhile than individual computer geeks thanks to economies of
scale.
One problem with most existing decentralized filesharing networks is that unpop-
ular files (such as your personal files) are not guaranteed to be available, unlike cen-
tralized cloud computing services which guarantee availability for a fee. Centralized
companies provided superior network availability and latency through centralized
oversight. A centralized company’s goal is to continually improve quality and has the
advantage of being able to consciously analyze and control their own dataflow, help-
ing companies “get closer to their customers”. The improved data allows companies
to consciously personalize their services to individual customers.
However, today P)P is making inroads in the competition with private companies
for internet space. The centralized client-server computing architecture is threatened
by new peer-to-peer networking architectures which are being built to spread decen-
tralized technology. Through the removal of centralized hosts and servers, the nodes
that form the peer-to-peer network make computing resources, such as disk storage,
network bandwidth, and processing power, directly available to each other. Network
effects proliferate in peer-to-peer networks because, unlike the traditional client-
server architecture which is subject to the linearly increasing per-unit costs, the peer-
to-peer network costs can decrease with each added node (depending on topology).
In the last decade we’ve seen P)P networks flourish, the most famous of which
are blockchains, which have made the first basic steps toward a proper incentive de-
sign in valuable networks by fairly remunerating their members.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
23 Originally developed by the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. See Yasha Levine, "Almost everyone
involved in developing Tor was (or is) funded by the US government", Pando Daily (S? July )@S\).
https://pando.com/)@S\/@f/S?/tor-spooks/ (Retrieved ^/^/)@).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

20 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
Blockchains
The original and most famous blockchain is Bitcoin.24 The Bitcoin protocol
emerged in )55L as an attempt by its founder, Satoshi Nakamoto, to provide an alter-
native to the shortcomings of the financial system in the aftermath of the )55p finan-
cial crisis. A strong distrust of government and central banking is part of the political
philosophy of the Bitcoin community to create an alternative to fiat currencies. The
community believes cryptocurrency to be a solution immune from national govern-
mental control.
A blockchain is a distributed ledger—it keeps track of some types of transactions
from its members. For example, Bitcoin keeps track of the P)P transactions where
members send digital tokens representing money (bitcoins) to each other. What
makes this ledger valuable is a long list of qualities, some of which are unique to block-
chains technology. Not all blockchains have the same qualities, but most are modeled
on the basics of Bitcoin, which is immutable, immortal, open, uncensorable, transpar-
ent, and decentralized.
Blockchains such as Bitcoin are decentralized through their P)P architecture,
since no central authority is completely in charge of anything, including ownership,
security, or upgrades. Bitcoin is immutable, meaning the entire history of transactions
is never changed—not one letter or number amongst the billions of records will ever
change in response to the demands of any centralized authority. It’s open, meaning
anyone with a connection to the internet can download and run the client software to
participate in the network without seeking the permission of anyone else. (Open net-
works are sometimes called permissionless.) Bitcoin is immortal, in the sense that as
long as there is any freedom in the internet, any machine that chooses to download
and run the software (even just for curiosity) will keep the blockchain alive. Further
(cid:0)(cid:0)
24 Most people want to know which blockchain coins to invest in. We’ve read more than S@@ white
papers detailing the function of different blockchains, and glanced at many more. We’re sorry that we
can’t publicly recommend investment in any of them. Yet. We have faith the technology will be a major
component in the economy of the future. But the fundamentals of every one of these networks are
lacking at the moment. We expect this point in history to be a more extreme version of the dot-com
boom and bust, where around S@@@ to T@@@ startup internet companies failed, but the most powerful
and profitable companies in history emerged. We won’t print our guesses for which blockchains will
thrive. Instead we spend the rest of the book explaining why the WebU boom and bust will continue,
and what P)P networks must do to emerge successfully. Put simply, when you see a network which
has designed secure and effective mechanisms for incentivizing development and democratically gov-
erning the deployment of those innovations, invest heavily. In )@)@, the authors are not aware of a
network with anything approaching such qualities. Which ones will eventually decentralize their power
is impossible to predict, because it’s illogical to do so until those in power are forced.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 21
the network is perfectly transparent, allowing complete audits of every transaction,
yet it protects its users’ privacy through cryptography.
The Bitcoin protocol created the first decentralized P)P network that could man-
age valuable assets without resorting to a centralized authority. But the centralizing
forces of competition led to concentration of power in the Bitcoin network, as econo-
mies of scale led to large computer farms devoted to mining for bitcoins, instead of
millions of individual network members maintaining the ledger on their laptops.
Many other blockchain architectures have attempted to improve or generalize
Bitcoin’s functionality. They’ve built tools that improve on Bitcoin’s protocol to inhibit
Bitcoin’s many problems (we’ll talk about some later, such as ASIC-resistance and
sharding), and they’ve built new tools that allow us to decentralize more of the func-
tions of business. The most prominent blockchain besides Bitcoin is Ethereum.25 Six
years after Bitcoin published its first block, Bitcoin developers, aficionados, and critics
started the Ethereum blockchain in )5Kx, providing a ledger with much more compli-
cated transactions, called smart contracts.
Smart contracts are automated, computer-programmed business contracts. The
smart contract program can be written in many different programming languages, the
most popular being Solidity.26 They automatically track the transfer of money and
assets and labor between parties, without human oversight. They automatically adju-
dicate when something goes wrong (and something always goes wrong in business),
again without human oversight. Thus, we say smart contracts are self-executing and
self-regulating.
A smart contract allows more complex business logic than merely transferring dig-
ital coins from one user’s digital wallet to another’s. The idea is to be able to write
sophisticated programs which dynamically control the timing and execution of any
business contract, to act as automated escrow for many different types of digital busi-
ness assets.
A smart contract is computer code which is executed automatically by the P)P
network if it is written properly and uploaded to the network according to the trans-
parent rules the network follows. The network of thousands, or millions, of computers
create a “world computer” with a “virtual machine” using P)P distributed storage and
processing, whose goal is to be fully decentralized.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
25 For example, it has long held the second highest market capitalization, behind Bitcoin.
26 If you have some experience with high-level programming languages such as C++ or Java, you can
start programming in one of a few IDEs optimized for interacting with the Ethereum blockchain, such
as Remix or Ethereum Studio (available at https://remix.ethereum.org/ and https://stu-
dio.ethereum.org/, retrieved ^/\/)@). An IDE is an integrated development environment, which sim-
plifies debugging and some command line programming, such as compiling.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

22 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
The goal of decentralizing our economy doesn’t end with decentralized digital
money and smart contracts. More ambitiously, the crypto community blockchain de-
velopers have their sights on decentralizing every function of Web ).5.
Web>
There are many other groups which have developed various versions of WebG
applications using P)P architecture. To name some major decentralized applications
that are currently being used and illustrate the potential for the future:
Bitcoin ()55L) decentralizes transnational currency, its production, accounting,
and exchange.
Bitmessage ()5K)) decentralizes messaging service for temporary information.
Many others have different levels of security and interoperability. Especially of note
was the Skype video and telephone P)P system before Microsoft supernodes took
over in May )5KK.27
InterPlanetary Filing System (IPFS) ()5Kx) provides P)P temporary file storage and
computation.
Ethereum ()5Kx) decentralizes computation and permanent records for multi-
party smart contracts.
ZeppelinOS ()5Kp) is a decentralized operating system for smart contract devel-
opers. Built on top of Ethereum, it provides a stable evolutionary environment for de-
veloping secure smart contracts.
The goal of these tools is to provide the decentralized information technology to
build fully decentralized applications (DApps) for basic users. The tools listed above
are already helping developers to easily build DApps to connect your cellphone to net-
works of other users. More ambitiously, the goal of building these P)P tools is to cre-
ate DAOs. The idea is to make a single complicated set of programmed protocols that
can automate the interaction between a (possibly very large, international) network
of members who wish to cooperate on a business venture without requiring a central
authority to make investment decisions and settle disputes.
There are three major reasons our institutions and economy will become more
efficient by decentralizing with DApps and DAOs.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
27 Dan Goodin, “Skype replaces P)P supernodes with Linux boxes hosted by Microsoft (updated)”, Ars
Technica May Sst ()@S)) Available online at https://arstechnica.com/information-technol-
ogy/)@S)/@T/skype-replaces-p)p-supernodes-with-linux-boxes-hosted-by-microsoft/ (Retrieved
^/^/)@).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 23
First, decentralization gives individuals more power and autonomy, unleashing
information at the edge. It gives us autonomy over our personal information and over
our economic choices, such as where and how and with whom we should collaborate.
Decentralization empowers and motivates those on the edge to participate and con-
tribute their talents, unlocking previously untapped potential. Empowering members
makes the whole organization more efficient.
Second, decentralization is ideal in chaotic times, when technology and business
arrangements are continually changing. The most talented members for any task are
not blocked by a rigid hierarchy. Decentralized platforms can give us perfectly level
playing fields for markets. Open markets find the best autonomous individuals to more
efficiently solve new problems instead of relying on a large bureaucracy to organize a
response using an outdated structure. This is tapping into information at the edge.
Third, the liquidity of decentralization is more efficient and stable in the long
term, making regulation more dynamic and responsive. Computer processors are able
to filter the voluminous information available through global networking to make
good decisions. Information from more sources has more equal value than it does in
centralized systems. Information at the edge greatly changes decision making. Google
Maps sifts through the data of millions of drivers to dynamically determine where traf-
fic jams occur to decide how to advise on users’ best routes. The opposite situation
holds in more hierarchical structures, where, for instance it is very unlikely that the
understandings of the lowliest employees will ever affect the decision making of a
single chief executive of a company. Decentralized information technology is needed
to make regulation more dynamic. We now face unfathomably complex legal interac-
tions governing the exponentially growing and evolving business interactions that
arise with AI-enabled IoT devices (artificial intelligence enabled Internet of Things).
How can we legally regulate the smart contracts which mediate between devices
owned by many different companies and individuals interacting throughout the sup-
ply chain? New efficient processes lead to newer more efficient processes. Business
arrangements constantly adapt to these changing circumstances giving new contracts.
The choice again resolves to dictatorship versus democracy. These business problems
can be solved with complete ownership by a super-trust, global monopoly firm which
avoids all legal contracts. Otherwise we need decentralized markets where fair con-
tracts can emerge.
The engineer’s common perspective is to imagine that we are removing regula-
tion with these automated processes. In fact, the purpose of smart contracts is to give
much more fine-grained regulation, more control, not less. In order to give a stable
environment where such processes can evolve predictably, we need a decentralized
organization, a level playing field for cooperation, an institution which has inertia
given by a more fully transparent and democratically written history.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

24 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
What distinguishes WebG from Web ).5 is the potential to completely decentral-
ize valuable business networks. Bitcoin demonstrated that protocols can be designed
which organize a network of peer-to-peer (P)P) collaborators without the need for
any centralized ownership structure, unlike the Web ).5 companies. No single entity
owns or controls Bitcoin or Ethereum. The ownership and control of these valuable
networks is distributed loosely amongst its network members—ideally, they would be
distributed according to their participation.
In Bitcoin and Ethereum, there is no formal binding governance framework de-
claring how the protocols for consensus might be changed in the future. This is a deep
flaw which weakens these networks and will lead to instability. But their relative suc-
cess in running a network with a US}K55 billion market cap, the largest among all dig-
ital assets, for K5 years—without any governance framework—demonstrates the po-
tential of the system. Instituting a transparent democratic governance process will
make the networks much more efficient and stable. We explore some possibilities for
governance in Chapter [.
In order to grapple with the problems arising from these decentralized technolo-
gies, we need to understand the basic structures underlying these new P)P architec-
tures.
Web$ P’P technology
In this section we explore some of the many new P)P tools that are being actively
developed for implementing the WebG vision, making it easier for software engineers,
and even students, to design tools for empowering new networks devoted to profit.
We’ve taught several courses in law and mathematics discussing P)P technology and
its impact on society. Craig taught a computer science course in the Spring of )5)5
entitled Introduction to Blockchain Technology. Though some students had barely
heard of Bitcoin in the first class, every student had a valid idea for a novel DApp and
DAO by the second class meeting. One group wanted to tweak the notion of a decen-
tralized marketplace, like OpenBazaar.28 Another chose a decentralized ticketing app
so venues for entertainment could invent secure digital admission tokens, and at-
tendees could participate in a transparent decentralized market for the tickets. A third
chose to build a decentralized dog breed registry.
It took only a few hours for students with no previous experience with distributed
computing to build a basic functioning DApp from scratch, connecting their website
frontend UI to the Ethereum test blockchain with JavaScript. They simply adapted
(cid:0)(cid:0)
28 https://openbazaar.org/
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 25
online tutorials and followed the text, Mastering Ethereum.29 These tools didn’t exist
a few years earlier, but the technology is changing quickly, thanks to a collaborative
open source community devoted to decentralization which naturally encourages
widespread adoption through education.
The decentralized information technology tools available to software developers
fall into G broad categories: processing, storage, and communication.
Processing or distributed computing
Blockchain architecture, computations are performed redundantly, concurrently.
E.g., Ethereum, Bitcoin
Parallel processing, where computations are partitioned. E.g., IPFS, Neural net-
work training/federated learning DCAI ()5KL), GIMPS (Great Internet Mersenne Prime
Search, KLLm), Leela@Home (chess neural network training, )5Kp)
Storage
Temporary: distributed hashtable architectures. E.g., IPFS, Filecoin, Swarm, Open-
Bazaar
Permanent: blockchain architectures
Communication
Internet browsing: Tor, Zeronet, Freenet, dn])
Messaging: Bitmessage, Matrix, Whisper
File sharing: IPFS, Storj, BitTorrent ()55K)
Software developers are rapidly improving the tools to decentralize any task pro-
vided by centralized apps. As technology and incentive structures improve, these prof-
itable P)P tools are improving, in security and usability.
To understand how these programs achieve decentralization through distributed
computing, we take a short digression into two basic math tools, hash functions and
cryptography. Then we can explain in more detail how Bitcoin and Ethereum work. All
of this is in service of exploring new designs for decentralized WebG alternatives to
today’s centralized institutions.
New tools: hash functions
The fundamental tool that engineers are using to decentralize the economy is
pure math—especially hashing and cryptography.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
29 Andreas Antonopolous and Gavin Wood, Mastering Ethereum, O’Reilly Media, )@S^. I recommend
the tutorial at cryptozombies.io (retrieved ?/U/)@).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

26 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
Hash functions were an early computing innovation; they’ve been around since
KLxG. They have many uses, but their primary application in P)P networking is to effi-
ciently organize the chaotic information of random messages being sent in a global
network with no leader. They take any data as input and return a pseudorandom num-
ber. One of the most common hash functions used in P)P programs is SHA-)xm, which
stands for secure hash algorithm. For example, if we input the word “decentralization”
into the SHA function, we get a number that is )xm binary digits long:
SHA(“decentralization”) =
K5KK55KKK555KKK555K555K55KKKKK5K5K5KKK5KKKK5K5K5KK55KK5555KK5K5K55KK55KKKK5KK
KKK5K55555K55KKKKK5KK55K5KK5K5555KK5KKK555KK5K555KKK5K5555KK5KKK5KKKK5K55K5
5555K5K555KKKKKKKKKK555KK5KKKK5KK5KK5K5KK555KK5KKK5K5K5KKKKK555555KK5K5KK5K55
5KK5KK5K55KK55555K5K5KKKKKK
This is a very big number, but computers can process it very quickly—combining
it with other numbers—because its binary structure works naturally with binary logic
circuits.
SHA quickly converts any amount of information into a )xm-bit number. If we en-
ter the first page of this book, SHA immediately outputs
K555K5KK5K555K5KKKKKKKKK55KK5K55K5K55KKKKK5555K5K5K55KKKKKKKKKKKK5K5KKKK55K
55KKK5KK55K5KKK555555K5KKKKK5KK55K5K55555555KK555KKK5KKK5KK5K55555555KK5K
5K5K5K5KKK55KK55555K555KK5K55KKK5KK5K55KKKKKK5KK5K55KK5KKK55555KKKK55KK5KK55
5K5KK5KKK5K555K55K55K555K5KK5K5K
and if you delete the last letter SHA outputs
K5KK55K55KKK55KKKK555KK555K55K5K555K5K5555K5K5K5K55KK5K55K55KK5KK5K55
KKKK5KK55K5K55K5KKKKKK5555KK555KK55555K55KKKKKKKKKK5KK5KK5555KKKKK555KK5K5KK5K
5KKKKKK55KKK5555K5KKKK55KK5KKK5KK555555KKK5K5KKK55K5KK5KKKK555KK5KK55KK5K555K
555555KKK555KK55KK55555K55555KK5
which is completely different. Notice there seems to be no pattern connecting the
two numbers, even though the two inputs were almost identical, with only a tiny dif-
ference of one letter out of a page of information. We say SHA outputs a pseudoran-
dom number, because the number appears to be randomly coming out of the func-
tion, but in fact the function is perfectly deterministic, that is, the function follows a
fixed procedure. If we check the answer to SHA(“decentralization”) today or next week
or K55 years from now we will always get the same result.
Engineers use this deterministic pseudorandomness property for error detection
and proof of ownership. If someone copies a file, of any size, if there is one error any-
where in the copy, then the hash of the copy will be very different from the hash of
the original, plainly exposing the error. In another application that is regularly used, if
you publish the hash of your file before anyone else, then you can claim priority when-
ever anyone else later publishes a copy of the file. The output of the hash function is
a number that is much smaller than the large data you entered, and the output is
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 27
unique to that data (by any practical standard). The output is an identifier, a name, or
address—an ID—for the file that is easy for computers to use.
However, the most important property for decentralized P)P applications is how
hash tables organize randomly occurring data. Let’s consider for a moment how the
Visa credit card company keeps track of the thousands or millions of transactions that
are occurring in its global network. How do they organize these transactions that are
coming in randomly from different users in countries all over the world? How do they
label and store them all? Now consider the problem of a decentralized payment sys-
tem, like Bitcoin, which must do that without having a leader. How can the network
of computers come to consensus? How do they all agree on how to name and store
each new randomly occurring transaction? The hash function. If anybody in the world
takes the data from a single transaction and hashes it, they will invariably come to the
same output, because the hash function is deterministic. Each transaction will get a
unique output for its ID, because there are so many possible outputs.
This crucial feature of hash functions, that there are many, many possible outputs
to a hash function deserves to be explored for a moment. For SHA-)xm there are !!"# ≈
#.#%&’×#)$$ different outputs. The idea is that there are ) possible outputs in a K-digit
binary number: 5 and K. There are !! =+ possible outputs in a )-digit binary number:
55, 5K, K5, and KK. In a SHA-)xm output, there are )xm binary digits, so there are !!"#
different outputs, which is a very big number. It’s approximately the number of atoms
in the observable universe.30 So, since hash functions take any information input and
return a statistically random output among these #)$$ different outputs, it’s almost
impossible two different inputs will get the same output.
By taking the hash output as the label for the input, we can label any sort of thing
humans can ever create. Counting up every muscle twitch from every person on the
planet for the next million years, would not come remotely close to #)$$. The different
SHA output numbers naturally organize everything from biggest to smallest. In the
Bitcoin blockchain, for example, in the last K5 years there have been more than x55
million transactions that unpredictably entered the network from any user on the
planet struck by the whim to send a coin. Thanks to the hash function, every node in
the network hashes the transaction’s data and independently arrives at the same an-
swer, giving the transaction a unique ID that everyone recognizes. This mechanism
drives consensus in an extremely decentralized global network thanks to the extreme
protocol centralization of mathematics. This gives the technological basis for creating
(cid:0)(cid:0)
30 The number is estimated between ’+#$ and ’+$".
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

28 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
consensus on the creation and ownership of digital money, specifically bitcoin, with-
out the need for a centralized authority dictating, “let it be done”, which is the English
translation of the Latin word fiat.31
New tools: blockchain protocols
In this section we explain the architecture of the first blockchain network, Bitcoin.
The point of a blockchain is to create a decentralized network that records data on the
network’s transactions. There are two main types of transactions the Bitcoin network
needs to account for. This first transaction type is a transfer of digital tokens, called
bitcoins, from one user to another. The second transaction that needs to be accounted
for is the creation of a bitcoin. What makes these digital tokens, these bitcoins, valu-
able? The blockchain is the record of all these transactions—we refer to the blockchain
as a distributed ledger. What makes this ledger valuable is that it is immutable, uncen-
sorable, immortal, open, and decentralized. Further the network is perfectly transpar-
ent, allowing complete audits of every monetary transaction, yet it protects its users’
privacy. We explain next how hash functions make these qualities possible.
Whenever someone sends a bitcoin digital token to another member of the net-
work, the transaction data is hashed to give it a special identity. Everybody who is
running their machine on the Bitcoin network can hear about the transaction. The
hash number distinguishes it from every other transaction and orders all transactions
by number. Through peer-to-peer gossiping, each machine in the network—each
node—relays the useful information it receives to anyone else listening, and they can
each independently hash the data and come to consensus with the same hash output.
No central authority needs to be in charge of the database. Since there are so many
possible output hashes, it is practically impossible for any two transactions to get the
same hash address (this would be called a collision). Even if every person on the planet
joins the network, even if they all made thousands of transactions every second, even
if the Bitcoin network lasts for thousands of years, it is extremely unlikely there will
ever be a single collision.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
31 Fiat money is the term for national currencies which are not backed by any promise for exchange.
Most of our students in math and law—and even economics—are not aware that no nation on Earth
still backs their paper money with gold or silver. The ability of opaque central banks to decide when
to print specie, putting their fingers on the scale of the economy benefitting some over others, is ar-
gued to be the primary motivation for Bitcoin’s inception. Evidence for this position includes the fa-
mous comment in the Bitcoin blockchain’s genesis block: “The Times @U/Jan/)@@] Chancellor on brink
of second bailout for banks”.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 29
In Bitcoin, you make a type of hash table (technically called a Merkle tree) of all
the transactions that are waiting in the network cloud to be added to the Bitcoin block-
chain. This is called a block. The blockchain is then the sequence of blocks (hash tables)
that are created roughly every K5 minutes. If you are participating in the Bitcoin block-
chain, when you win the Bitcoin lottery amongst all the other computers in the net-
work, then you win about US}L5,555 worth of newly minted bitcoins (block reward
as of May )5)5) and the right to put a new block on the chain. Your block will be the
hash table of all the transactions your computer has seen in the last K5 minutes since
the previous block. Then the lottery starts again to decide who will produce the next
block K5 minutes later.
The way you win the Bitcoin lottery is to stick the address of the previous block
into the SHA hash function. The output will be a )xm-bit number which will start with
some number of zeros. If it starts with enough zeros, you win. In June, )5)5 you need
]] zeros out of )xm, but the difficulty is adjusted automatically every ) weeks to try to
keep the average rate of block production at K block per K5 minutes. The first output
you get is extremely unlikely to begin with ]] zeros, however. So you can try again
after adding more data to the input. This input data is called your nonce. You keep
trying new nonces until you find an output with ]] zeros. On average, you will need
to try Kp,555,555,555,555 or Kp trillion times before you win.
Once you announce your winning nonce, everyone in the network can quickly val-
idate that you are correct, since they only need to calculate one hash to verify for
themselves. The process described above is called Bitcoin’s proof of work (PoW) con-
sensus algorithm. It’s the process the network uses to come to agreement, or consen-
sus, about how the network is going to update itself every K5 minutes, adding new
transfers of bitcoins between users around the world.
The Bitcoin blockchain is open and politically decentralized, because anyone with
access to the internet can participate, but no single entity is in charge—no one owns
the network. Anyone can join the lottery and participate in creating the blockchain.
The process is very protocol centralized, however, since everyone is supposed to use
the same PoW consensus algorithm.
The blockchain is immutable, because any attempt to edit the old blocks will be
immediately rejected by the network. A single number or letter changed anywhere in
its entire history will result in a different hash of the information. The error-correcting
property of hash functions make such attempts immediately apparent. As long as the
network is following the blockchain protocol, they will automatically reject any edit,
no matter how small. The blockchain grows forever and the history of all the blocks
are never deleted. The hashing of the previous block built into the nonce for the next
block gives security. If a single digit of information anywhere in any past block is ever
changed, the hashes will not work to give a nonce with the correct number of zeros,
unless the editor does the work of the entire network and finds new nonces for all the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

30 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
blocks after the edit, which would require them to be faster than the entire network
currently while also reproducing the past work of the entire network. Anyone broad-
casting false information can be quickly checked and ignored. It is therefore reasona-
ble to assume that all information added to the blockchain is eternal, uneditable, and
uncensorable.
The blockchain is uncensorable since it is open and decentralized. Anyone can
publish a new block if they find a nonce. Blocks have been posted in the Bitcoin block-
chain which violate the EU’s )5Kp GDPR law (General Data Protection Regulation).
People’s private information have been included in blocks against their will. The GDPR
requires the owners of the websites that post information to remove that information,
however that is certainly not going to happen.32 The network would need to create a
hard fork to remove the information. More than half of the network’s nodes would be
required to change their entire protocol to scrub the data and restart the blockchain.
This would need to happen every time information was found on the blockchain which
violated the GDPR. The only other choice the EU has is to prevent every citizen in the
EU from participating in the Bitcoin network or accessing any of its information. But
even that wouldn’t stop the blockchain, because it is immortal.
The Bitcoin blockchain is immortal, or eternal, in the sense that the blockchain
will last as long as the internet does, as long as it is in any degree free. If any one
computer in any country has access to the information of the blockchain, then they
can keep the blockchain running. Even if we imagine Bitcoin has no value or usefulness
to society a century from now, a single hobbyist who is interested in forgotten things
from the past can keep the network running.
Further, the Bitcoin blockchain embodies transparency. Every transaction is rec-
orded eternally, and any computer that connects to the network can inspect and audit
every single transaction that has ever occurred. Everyone has equal access to all the
information in the blockchain. This quality is essential to allow a valuable decentral-
ized network to function without a centralized authority to maintain the validity of the
ledger.
Finally, the blockchain uses strong cryptographic tools to securely maintain its us-
ers’ privacy. We discuss these tools in the next section. But first, let’s consider some
of the many downsides of blockchain technology.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
32 Shannon Liao, “Major blockchain group says Europe should exempt Bitcoin from new data privacy
rule”, The Verge (Apr T, )@S^). Available online at https://www.thev-
erge.com/)@S^/\/T/SfS]])S@/blockchain-coin-center-gdpr-europe-bitcoin-data-privacy (Accessed
^/U/)@)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 31
The most common criticism of the Bitcoin network is that hashing these nonces
requires a great deal of computation and energy. It’s actually worse than what is de-
scribed above. Everyone in the global network is competing to find the nonce. This
means that many different computers are redundantly trying the same wrong nonces
before one computer finally tries the right one. The Bitcoin network is performing
about #)!%=K55,555,555,555,555,555,555 hashes every second in June )5)5. That
requires as much energy as the entire country of the Czech Republic. Bitcoin has
around G55,555 transactions per day, but they use much more energy than the Visa
credit card network, which handles Kx5,555,555 million transactions a day, or x55
times the volume. A more accurate name would be the Proof of Pollution consensus
mechanism, since work generally strives to be useful and efficient.
That wasted energy is why most blockchain networks are attempting to find a
different consensus algorithm. The leading candidate is called proof of stake (PoS),
which generally involves block producers locking their money in a smart contract so
they can have the chance to be picked by a pseudorandom number generator. The
problem is that if someone comes up with a clever algorithm for hijacking the process,
then the network would fail. We discuss this difficulty further in Chapter ].
The second major problem with blockchain technology is that it will always be
expensive, whether or not PoS is fully solved. Every bitcoin in existence originally was
created as a reward for winning one of the hash lotteries when a block was built and
published. The way to verify a bitcoin is valid is to check the legitimacy of the entire
chain. If you want to fully participate in the network, you need to download a copy of
the entire history of every transaction of every bitcoin in existence. This extreme re-
dundancy and inefficiency means transactions will always be expensive.
This leads us to speculate that more efficient systems will emerge which handle
smaller transactions. A good idea for a DAO is a decentralized banking system built on
top of the Bitcoin ledger that charges a smaller fee for temporarily storing minor trans-
actions. These smaller transactions can then be bundled together to make a larger
Bitcoin transaction reflected on the eternal blockchain. We discuss such ideas further
in Chapter p, with ZKRollups. To understand those tools, we need to understand zero-
knowledge (ZK) proofs, which are explained in the next section.
The Bitcoin blockchain is a fundamental advance in decentralized organization.
Before Bitcoin, there were very few examples of politically decentralized organizations
that were worth money. There were decentralized religious organizations, like the
Quakers. The Apache tribe was an extremely decentralized cultural organization be-
fore the KLK5s. But competition for wealth centralized their organization. The Maghribi
traders are the best example of an organization devoted to profit which remained de-
centralized. The Maghribis used secure and meaningful reputation to counteract the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

32 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
centralizing influence of competition for profits. But the Maghribis’ KKth century sys-
tem would not work in our contemporary globally-connected networks. We want to
go much further than the Maghribis, and build economic networks which allow the
autonomous members to protect their privacy by remaining anonymous. We are do-
ing this with the second major advance in information technology: modern cryptog-
raphy.
New tools: Public-key cryptography and zero-knowledge proofs
Cryptography is the art of writing secret codes. The word lends its prefix to the
words “cryptocurrencies” (like Bitcoin) and “crypto-economy”, alluding to the fact
that the technologies are built from a profound devotion to providing user privacy in
a decentralized and pseudonymous setting.
Public key cryptography allows secrets to be passed securely within a public net-
work, despite the fact that every message is shared with everyone else. This is essen-
tial to providing privacy in a decentralized network, as you don’t need to rely on a
centralized authority to maintain security and keep your secrets safe from others. Pub-
lic key cryptography was first presented in KL[m, and has been used for decades to
secure internet messages, such as making purchases on websites.
For example, when you make a purchase on Amazon or Alibaba, you enter your
credit card number into your computer and send it off to their company through the
internet. The internet relays the information around various nodes, and these mes-
sages are available to thieves around the world. So, of course your credit card infor-
mation is encrypted.
But how does it get encrypted? Amazon sends your computer the instructions for
how to encrypt the message. You use their public key to scramble the information.
But the thief is also listening to these instructions. The thief knows how you encrypted
the information—the thief has Amazon’s public key—and the thief has your encrypted
information. Why can’t the thief unscramble your information if they have your scram-
bled message and they know how you scrambled it?
The trick involves just a little bit of elementary school arithmetic, divisors and re-
mainders, but more math than we want to drag our readers through. Basically, Ama-
zon has another key, called a private key, that makes it easy to unscramble the infor-
mation. But if you don’t have their secret private key, then it takes an enormous
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 33
amount of computation to unscramble the message by brute force—more computa-
tion than all the computers on Earth working in parallel for the next billion years.33
This mismatch between the sender and the receiver’s power is called asymmetric en-
cryption.
Public key cryptography’s most useful feature in P)P systems is called a digital
signature. The idea is that you can invert the process described above. The owner of
the secret private key can encrypt their message with the private key, then anyone in
the network can use the public key to unencrypt the message with the public key. That
way anyone can verify that the sender of the message must have the private key, with-
out requiring the owner to reveal the actual private key. That digital signature trick is
how you can prove you own a bitcoin or any other digital asset without losing it, and
so underlies any P)P system involving valuable tokens. You need to keep the private
key secret, or else anyone who finds it immediately gains control of your assets. (Bil-
lions of USD worth of bitcoin have been lost in this way.34)
The digital signature trick is the simplest example of a zero-knowledge proof. The
idea is that the private key owner can prove they are the owner without revealing the
private key. The other members have proof of ownership, while the owner reveals
zero knowledge of the specific key string. More complicated zero-knowledge proofs
are giving P)P application users the power to privately interact despite being in a pub-
lic and decentralized network. For example, a DAO devoted to health care insurance
can give members a synthesized health score from 5 to K55. The protocol for synthe-
sizing your complex health history is public, but your particular health history stays
private while you reveal only your final health score to the insurance DAO. Even that
(cid:0)(cid:0)
33 This is considered sufficient standard for security in the present, but it ignores the possibility of
radical future improvements to information technology. However, as long as there is not a centralized
monopoly on computational power, then these P)P tools will be safe in the foreseeable future. Even
threats such as theoretical future quantum computers have already been resolved with open source
cryptographic algorithms which are hardened against quantum computing. https://en.wikipe-
dia.org/wiki/Post-quantum_cryptography (Retrieved ^/))/)@).
34 An early and famous case is the Mt. Gox theft, in which ^T@,@@@ bitcoins belonging to customers
and the company were stolen in )@S\. At the time, those coins were worth about one half billion USD.
In )@)@ they would be worth n^ billion. Bitcoin.com has estimated that more than USnU billion worth
of cryptocurrency was stolen in )@S^ alone. https://news.bitcoin.com/]-million-day-lost-cryptocur-
rency-scams/ (Retrieved July )@, )@)@.) It’s important to note that all of this theft comes from central-
ized institutions, especially centralized currency exchanges, like Mt. Gox was. The Bitcoin network it-
self has never made a single mistake; not a single bitcoin has ever been stolen from the blockchain by
a hack directly on the network, even though its entire source code is publicly available for analysis. Its
decentralization architecture provides remarkable stability and security, even under complete trans-
parency and globally open access to participation.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

34 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
number could be secured, by mixing it with other information, such as parts of your
property to be insured, or other members from your company.
Anonymity: pros and cons
A major advantage of anonymity in a large network is that it can encourage justice
by eliminating many sources of discrimination. In a DAO whose members are anony-
mous, discrimination based on superficial identifiers such as race, ethnicity, sex, gen-
der, sexuality, age, and social class is eliminated to the first order. At the second order,
when people infer those qualities from behavior, anonymity doesn’t protect a group
from discrimination. It also doesn’t protect a group from third-order effects of sys-
temic discrimination. In fact, anonymity can exacerbate )nd and Grd-order effects, as
it makes it more difficult to detect. To combat such effects, different mechanisms in
the governance of a decentralized organization must be employed.
The most basic economic effect of anonymity is to provide safety for its members.
Safety gives people confidence to engage in business deals, to participate in larger
networks of collaborators. Safety is an institutional overhead burden, like insurance
and appeals processes. But it’s used because it gives business a catalyst to make deals.
This makes the entire economy more liquid and efficient, so the investment is worth-
while. Anonymity provides safety through privacy, which is especially important in a
global network. Anonymity encourages more contributions, making the network
stronger. The network effect advantages any strategy that makes a network larger.
If the globe has access to your data, it can be used against you. Reporters, political
dissidents under oppressive governments, and whistleblowers all have obvious ene-
mies they need to protect themselves from. In many such cases, they cannot work
without anonymity. In a world with [ billion potential actors, people get attacked
online without any apparent reason. Wikipedia editors who simply curate generic ar-
ticles regularly get attacked. If you want to create an environment where people can
contribute to controversial pages on either side of an issue, expect to be targeted by
enemies with an agenda. Participation will crater if contributors are afraid every nug-
get of information they share will be available for the rest of their career for analysis
by superiors. 35
(cid:0)(cid:0)
35 “Respondents raised concerns about what it could do to their reputation if current and future em-
ployers or coworkers knew what information they were contributing to Wikipedia.” Cited from Drexel
University, “Just give me some privacy: Anonymous Wikipedia editors explain why they don't want
you to know who they are”, https://phys.org/news/)@S?-S@-privacy-anonymous-wikipedia-editors-
dont.html October S), )@S?, which cites Andrea Forte, Nazanin Andalibi, Rachel Greenstadt, “Privacy,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 35
However, anonymity can give people too much safety in a decentralized network.
With anonymity you get many more trolls—anonymous participants might feel safe
enough to attack other members without fear of retribution. Therefore, anonymity
should be balanced. Your power to broadcast your voice should be tempered by hav-
ing that voice tied with a pseudonymous36 account with meaningful and valuable rep-
utation. If you abuse your broadcasting power, then you should lose your reputation.
Is it possible to allow anonymous participants to broadcast their messages, to par-
ticipate in a network, especially when money is on the line, and expect anything but a
series of catastrophes? The Tragedy of the Commons is a natural consequence of al-
lowing anonymous participation. Anyone who has spent a few hours delving past the
top filtered contributions on platforms such as Twitter, YouTube comments, or Reddit
can observe the toxic results of anonymity. Occasionally graffiti is interesting, but most
anonymous comments are worthless bile which randomly express people’s dissatis-
faction with their condition, without communicating any lasting connections which
can improve society.
An excellent experiment to test this question, of whether anonymous groups can
create productive collaborations was Reddit’s Place37, which started on April Fool’s
Day, )5K[. The commons, in this case, was a blank canvas of internet space—one mil-
lion pixels, #)))×#))). Once every K5 minutes, any registered Reddit member could
change any pixel’s color. The idea was to get subreddit communities to collaborate
and compete to create art in a limited space for a limited but unspecified time.
Communities promoting their bases with symbols such as national flags and pixe-
lated works of classical art (The Starry Night and the Mona Lisa) competed with sub-
versive groups such as r/theblackvoid which coordinated attacks to desolate estab-
lished territories. Anything was possible, and Reddit’s editorial board was nervous
about the message the final image would convey about their site and their users, as
inevitably, thanks to the freedom from repercussions that anonymity provided, hate
symbols emerged, such as swastikas.
In the end, however, each time a hate symbol cropped up, it was replaced with
something more positive. In the end, r/place was a success because even though their
(cid:0)(cid:0)
Anonymity, and Perceived Risk in Open Collaboration: A Study of Tor Users and Wikipedians”, Pro-
ceedings of Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing, Portland Oregon.
http://andreaforte.net/ForteCSCWSf-Anonymity.pdf
36 Pseudonymous means using a false name. Anonymous means you do not reveal your name. This
subject is important to the cryptocommunity and some get bogged down arguing the small semantic
difference.
37 Josh Wardle & Justin Bassett (u/powerlanguage & u/Drunken_Economist), “Looking Back at r/Place”,
April S^, )@Sf. Available at https://redditblog.com/)@Sf/@\/S^/place-part-two/ (Retrieved f/S?/)@)@)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

36 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
anonymous members had the ability to destroy, they also had the power to defend
their own creations. This effect is regularly observable throughout history. For exam-
ple, the first Chinese dynasty, the Chin empire, quickly collapsed after following the
Hobbesian perspective that humanity is fundamentally evil. For most of the subse-
quent ),555 years of Chinese history, stability prevailed under the more generous
Confucian perspective of empowering and encouraging the good side of humanity.
We need to build a decentralized auditing system to keep track of pseudonymous
reputation. To do that we need sophisticated distributed programming that automat-
ically updates a member’s reputation based on communally accepted protocols. This
is solved with decentralized smart contracts.
New tools: the Ethereum blockchain and smart contracts
The blockchain technology that allows decentralized execution of unlimitedly
complicated business contracts between millions of members across the planet is
quite complex. The math and logic that it’s all built on, however, is not deep at all.
The operations of NOT and AND are functionally complete, meaning any program
imaginable can be built by chaining them together. Specifically, any program with fi-
nite inputs, which results in TRUE or FALSE at the end of the program, can be written
with chains of these operations. For example, if you study symbolic logic for a week38,
then you will learn DeMorgan’s law:
NOT(𝑥 AND 𝑦)⇔(NOT 𝑥) OR (NOT 𝑦)
So we can write OR as a chain of NOTs and ANDs as follows:
NOT8(NOT 𝑥) AND (NOT 𝑦)9⇔8NOT(NOT 𝑥)9 OR 8NOT(NOT 𝑦)9⇔𝑥 OR 𝑦
Remember the code of Ur-Nammu (ca. )K55 BC) discussed in Chapter K. Law #G)
reads:
G). IF a man had let an arable field to another man for cultivation AND he did NOT
cultivate it, turning it into wasteland, THEN he shall measure out three kur of barley
PER iku of field. [Ed.: capitalization mine.]
IF (x) THEN (𝑦) is equivalent to 𝑦 OR (NOT x). So we can chain NOTs and ANDs
together to write
IF(x)THEN(𝑦)⇔(NOT 𝑥) OR 𝑦⇔NOT8x AND (NOT 𝑦)9
(cid:0)(cid:0)
38 That knowledge is necessary to understand this paragraph, but not necessary to understand the
rest of this book. Symbolic logic is also not that difficult, and many resentful children master the skills
every day, despite lacking the motivation of understanding why it might be useful. Our education sys-
tem is in dire need of repair. http://intrologic.stanford.edu/public/home.php (Retrieved ^/^/)@).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization (cid:0) 37
This symbolic logic is not simple; it can get incredibly complicated by chaining
these operators together in unlimited arrangements. But it’s not deep. We’re just us-
ing NOTs and ANDs. So we only need to use two logic circuits to build the most sophis-
ticated legal contracts imaginable to organize a global economic network in a DAO.
The power comes from the fact that these operations can be performed reliably, at
the speed of light, millions of times per second.
Similarly, Ethereum’s ability to use these logic operations, and basic arithmetic,
and storing and reading information, makes it Turing complete, meaning it can theo-
retically approximate any mathematical model that exists.39 However, Ethereum is
not practically capable of mimicking the power of even the cheapest smartphone. The
storage limit is currently extremely small, because anything stored in the blockchain
needs to be stored redundantly on thousands of nodes for all time in the future. Any
message passed through the network is repeated millions of times. So Ethereum de-
centralizes computation of smart contract computer programs, but they are neces-
sarily extremely primitive, compared with the functions of centralized Web ).5 com-
panies, like the services Google offers.
Therefore, we have built many systems to adapt to these limitations. The Inter-
Planetary Filing System (IPFS) is a P)P file-sharing system which temporarily stores
files on some of the nodes in the network, based on how popular or important the
files are. IPFS was launched at around the same time as Ethereum, independently, and
interacts well with smart contracts. As an upgrade to BitTorrent, IPFS incorporates a
nascent incentive design with its own native token to motivate users to maintain the
availability of less popular information. We’ll discuss other architectures for improving
the function and efficiency of blockchains, such as sharding and ZKRollups, in Chapter
p.
With these extensions to blockchain functionality, many new groups are develop-
ing decentralized alternatives to centralized applications. These decentralized apps
are called DApps. DApps are intended to compete with centralized apps, in the hope
that decentralization will give users more power, making them more competitive than
centralized systems. For example, there are several initiatives developing ride sharing
alternatives to Uber, which hope to give greater transparency to customers and driv-
ers.
The idea is that users will download a DApp from a cryptographically verified de-
centralized P)P service like IPFS, then run the DApp on their own computer, instead
of using the blockchain to redundantly perform all calculations. The development lay-
ers are detailed in the figure below.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
39 Alan Turing is one of the most interesting people in history. It is well worth a Wikipedia dive into his
past.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

38 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Contemporary Decentralization
Machine code 001010101100
Figure ): Ethereum DApp stack. A DAO would consist of a network of users who
are all running the same DApp on their personal devices, using IPFS and Bitmessage to
communicate less securely, and the blockchain to securely finalize transactions.
When software designers refer to themselves as “full stack engineers”, they mean
they can negotiate the APIs (application to program interfaces) between each of these
layers.40 An API allows the different computers running the different layers to com-
municate. The most common APIs for Ethereum are integrated in the Truffle frame-
work, which helps developers connect (migrate) the functionality on one layer with
another, and organize the interfacing programs.
Development tools such as the Truffle framework and ZeppelinOS ()5Kp) are mak-
ing the process of developing DApps for DAOs easier every year. OpenZeppelin library
has a curated collection of carefully tested smart contracts that developers can copy
to build their projects. ZeppelinOS is an interface of smart contracts that are inde-
pendently deployed on the blockchain and are actively running for anyone to use, so
developers don’t need to redeploy them (or pay to deploy them in the first place).
With the open source atmosphere of WebG, every success is quickly replicated
and extended in new applications. Truly successful DAOs don’t exist, yet. Once the
architecture of a single DAO is successful, however, it will be quickly cloned and
adapted to every imaginable economic and social organization. In the next chapter,
we discuss what is holding them back. What is wrong with the open source movement
that has produced these remarkable tools, and how can it be fixed? What is needed
before WebG’s DApp-enabled DAOs can unleash humanity’s economic potential?
Bibliography
Formating example:
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
(cid:0)(cid:0)
40 Though very few of these people are telling the truth on their resumes, since it is a rare programmer
who ever engineers machine code. In practice a full stack engineer knows how to use JavaScript on a
UI, together with a high-level programming language, interfacing directly with the hardware.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782198

