STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
-
FIRST ORDER PRINCIPLES
Craig Calcaterra,* Wulf A. Kaal,** and Vadhindran Rao ***
Abstract
The emergence and proliferation of stable cryptocurrencies necessitate
the establishment of first order design principles for stable
cryptocurrencies. After highlighting the benefits of stable
cryptocurrencies for monetary policy making, overall market stability,
and their impact on the emergence of decentralized commerce, the
authors introduce First Order Principles for stable cryptocurrency design
and their essential functions. The core design features and their
interoperative feedback effects revolve around: (1) burning coins
through bonds vs. reserves, (2) transaction vs. holding taxes, (3)
repegging, and (4) governance.
Key Words: Stable Cryptocurrencies, Liquidity, Corruption, Cost,
Speculation, Inflation, Price Stability, Transparency, Feedback Effects,
Market Stability, Stability Mechanisms, Monetary Policy, Emerging
Technology, Crypto Economics, Token Models, Incentive Design,
Velocity, Supply, Demand, Tokens, Blockchain, Distributed Ledger
Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O3
* Professor of Mathematics, Metropolitan State University (Minneapolis,
USA)
** Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis,
USA)
*** Professor of Finance, Metropolitan State University (Minneapolis, USA)
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

Table of Contents
1 INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 2
2 BACKGROUND ........................................................................................ 7
3 FIRST ORDER PRINCIPLES FOR STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES ................. 14
3.1 CURRENCY MINTING AND BURNING ....................................................... 14
3.1.1 Minting .................................................................................... 15
3.1.2 Burning .................................................................................... 16
3.2 TRANSACTION TAXES VS. HOLDING TAXES ............................................... 22
3.3 REPEGGING...................................................................................... 23
3.4 GOVERNANCE................................................................................... 24
3.4.1 Features Subject to Monetary and Fiscal Policy ......................... 24
3.4.2 Communication Design ............................................................. 25
3.4.3 Ultimate Power ........................................................................ 25
3.4.4 Transcendental Values .............................................................. 27
4 CONCLUSION ........................................................................................ 28
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
1 INTRODUCTION
Stable cryptocurrencies have been defined as: “a type of
cryptocurrency that is designed to maintain a stable value, rather than
experiencing significant price changes.”1 Others define it as: “a new
class of cryptocurrencies which offer price stability and/or are backed
by reserve asset(s), [combining] the instant processing and security of
payments of cryptocurrencies, and the volatility-free stable valuations
of fiat currencies.”2
A currency which maintains a stable store of value is more efficient for
an economy than one which does not. Neither the renter nor the
landlord should sign a contract if its value might halve or double in any
given month. A fluctuating currency requires continual recalculation
and renegotiation. Therefore, any future decentralized economy will
require stable cryptocurrencies.
Since their inception in 2014 with Tether,3 stable cryptocurrencies have
primarily been used as a cash equivalent for cryptocurrency portfolios.
In 2019, stable cryptocurrencies have grown substantially in popularity
as an answer to the high volatility associated with the cryptocurrency
markets.4 Depending on their design, they can offer additional features
such as transparency, privacy, and increased decentralization. Stable
cryptocurrencies can also offer lower fees and faster transaction
speeds, making them rather useful for international transactions and
everyday payments.
1 Stablecoin, BINANCE ACADEMY,
https://www.binance.vision/glossary/stablecoin (last visited Apr. 24, 2019).
2 Stablecoin, INVESTOPEDIA (rev’d Shobhit Seth, Sep. 19, 2018),
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/stablecoin.asp.
3 Pete Rizzo, Realcoin Rebrands as ‘Tether’ to Avoid Altcoin Association,
COINDESK (Nov. 20, 2014, 12:01 PM), https://www.coindesk.com/realcoin-
relaunches-tether-avoid-altcoin-association.
4 Stablecoin, BINANCE ACADEMY,
https://www.binance.vision/glossary/stablecoin (last visited Apr. 24, 2019).
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

The evolution of stable cryptocurrencies creates a new opportunity to
reexamine earlier decades of monetary policy making and scholarship. In
particular, it allows an expansion and reexamination of the quantity
theory of money and associated models. In 2014, Robert Sams
introduced the first attempt at creating a stability mechanism for
cryptocurrencies.5 Sams’s early academic attempt was quickly followed
by commercial applications and expansions of his earlier vision.6
In 2019, the leading notable stable cryptocurrency startups and their
respective approaches include: Ampleforth,7 Paxos Standard Token
5 Robert Sams, A Note on Cryptocurrency Stabilisation: Seigniorage Shares,
BRAVE NEWCOIN (Apr. 28, 2015),
https://assets.ctfassets.net/sdlntm3tthp6/resource-asset-
r390/5a940afb21681d19c0b3b76cf69259e1/58ebe9e2-1f28-4a8d-8ce1-
26abef07aedf.pdf.
6 See, e.g., Smith + Crown, The Cryptoeconomics of Seigniorage Shares
Stablecoins: Basis and Carbon (May 28, 2018),
https://www.smithandcrown.com/cryptoeconomics-seignorage-shares-look-
basis-carbon/ (Basis’s design and expansion of Sams 2014).
7 P.H. Madore, Crypto Firm Fragments Launches Stablecoin Following
‘Ampleforth’ Rebrand, CCN.COM: News (Nov. 12, 2018),
https://www.ccn.com/crypto-firm-fragments-launches-stablecoin-following-
ampleforth-rebrand.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
(PAX),8 Gemini Dollar (GUSD),9 TrueUsd (TUSD),10 Circle’s CENTRE
consortium (USD-C),11 Facebook’s Stablecoin launch,12 and of course,
Tether,13 among several others.
8 Josiah Wilmoth, Paxos Standard: Why the Stablecoin You’ve Never Heard of
Just Might Take Down Tether, CCN.COM: ALTCOIN NEWS (Feb. 12, 2018),
https://www.ccn.com/paxos-standard-why-the-stablecoin-youve-never-heard-
of-just-might-take-down-tether.
9 Jack Mathis, Gemini’s New USD Cryptocurrency Stablecoin: A Whitepaper
Deep Dive, CCN.COM: ALTCOIN NEWS (Dec. 09, 2018),
https://www.ccn.com/geminis-new-usd-cryptocurrency-stablecoin-a-
whitepaper-deep-dive; see also Jeff Kauflin et al., The Most Innovative Fintech
Companies in 2019, FORBES.COM (Feb. 4, 2019, 10:00 AM),
https://www.forbes.com/fintech/2019/#4da63f0f2b4c.
10 COINTOPPER, Tether(USDT) Vs TrueUSD(TUSD): Which Stablecoin is Better?
(Sep. 5, 2018), https://cointopper.com/guides/tetherusdt-vs-trueusdtusd-
which-stablecoin-is-better; see also Bloomberg, Love Crypto But Not Its
Volatility? Meet Stablecoins, FORTUNE.COM (Jan. 30, 2019),
http://fortune.com/2019/01/30/stablecoins-bitcoin-cryptocurrency/; P.H.
Madore, Exclusive: TrueUSD Partners with Nexo to Provide Holders with Instant
Loans on Cryptocurrency, CCN.COM: EXCLUSIVE (Dec. 19, 2019),
https://www.ccn.com/exclusive-trueusd-partners-with-nexo-to-provide-
holders-with-instant-loans-on-cryptocurrency.
11 CRYPTOGLOBE Stablecoin Guide: Why are Stablecoins so Important to Crypto
Markets? (Oct. 11, 2018),
https://www.cryptoglobe.com/latest/2018/10/stablecoin-guide-why-are-
stablecoins-so-important-to-crypto-markets/.
12 Nathaniel Popper & Mike Isaac, Facebook and Telegram are Hoping to
Succeed Where Bitcoin Failed, N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 28, 2019, at B1;
see also Linas Kmieliauskas, Facebook is Already Pitching its Stablecoin to
Exchanges – Report, CRYPTONEWS (Mar. 01, 2019),
https://cryptonews.com/news/facebook-is-already-pitching-its-stablecoin-to-
exchanges-rep-3453.htm.
13 Nikhilesh De, Tether to Launch New Version of USDT Stablecoin on Tron
Blockchain, COINDESK (Mar. 4, 2019, 12:01 PM),
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

Existing projects fall into two broad categories, e.g. collateralized and
uncollateralized tokens. Both are subject to significant downsides.
Collateralized projects use either fiat currencies or cryptocurrencies as
collateral. Collateralized fiat currency pegs bear the brunt of expensive
capital requirements and uncollateralized cryptocurrency pegs face
heavy volatility pressures and swings.
Most stable cryptocurrency projects that claim to be collateralized with
fiat currency claim to be 100% backed. Without a 100% fiat
collateralization, such projects would run the risk of arbitrage trade
attacks similar to what Financier George Soros used to “break the bank
of England”.14 Fiat currency collateralization is expensive and inefficient
because all of the value that is backing the cryptocurrency needs to be
liquid, otherwise arbitrage opportunities, such as the Soros attack, are
possible. Therefore, the price tag of fiat-backed tokens is, at a minimum,
the interest rate of the pegged fiat currency.15
Cryptocurrency-backed tokens, are even more expensive, because the
stability is achieved with the (currently) much more unstable
cryptocurrencies. Any cryptocurrency-backed token must be backed
with much more than 100% of the current value of the cryptocurrency in
case the basket of other crypto currencies’ value drops. For example, in
https://www.coindesk.com/tether-to-launch-new-version-of-usdt-stablecoin-
on-tron-blockchain; see also Carlo C., Tether Brings Benefits of P2P
Transactions to Fiat Currency Transfers, COINTELEGRAPH (Nov. 22, 2014),
https://cointelegraph.com/news/tether-brings-benefits-of-p2p-transactions-
to-fiat-currency-transfers.
14 Devansch Lathia, How Soros Broke the British Pound, ECON. REV. AT NYU (Oct.
16, 2018), https://theeconreview.com/2018/10/16/how-soros-broke-the-
british-pound/.
15 See generally, Becky Leighton, What is a Fiat-backed Stablecoin?, COIN
INSIDER (Feb. 6, 2019), https://www.coininsider.com/what-is-a-fiat-backed-
stablecoin/ (“As the name implies, fiat stablecoins are tokens which are
associated with the value of a particular fiat currency. Usually, these tokens are
based on the US dollar and hold their value fixed at a 1:1 ratio.”).
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
MakerDAO, if a token is backed by Ether, and Ether drops by half at any
moment, then the automated scheme will punish anyone who has not
backed their tokens by more than 200%.16
The uncollateralized schemes include (formerly) Basis and NuBits, which
follow the quantity theory of money,17 algorithmically minting and
burning tokens in order to maintain a peg.18 At the time of this writing
no uncollateralized algorithmic project had created a provable stable
mechanism for its tokens.
This paper outlines the First Order Principles for stable cryptocurrency
projects. The authors emphasize the functioning and interplay between
1. Burning coins through bonds vs. reserves, 2. Transaction vs. holding
taxes, 3. Reserves, and 4. Governance.
16 MAKERDAO, The Dai Stablecoin System,
https://makerdao.com/en/whitepaper (last visited Apr. 25, 2019).
17 The quantity theory of money predicts that money growth should be neutral
in the long run in its effects on the growth rate of production and should affect
the inflation rate on a one-for-one basis. In David Hume's pioneering essays of
1752, Of Money and Of Interest, Hume stressed that changes in the number of
units of money in circulation will have proportional effects on all prices that
are stated in money terms. In turn, Hume suggests that changes in the number
of units of money in circulation have no effect on economic output, e.g. on
how much people produce or on the goods they produce or consume. The
quantity theory of money has evolved dramatically since the beginnings of
modern monetary theory in Hume’s pioneering essay. David Hume, Of Money
and of Interest, in WRITINGS ON ECONOMICS (Eugene Rotwein ed.1970).
18 Nader Al-Naji, Josh Chen & Lawrence Diao, Basis: A Price-Stable
Cryptocurrency with an Algorithmic Central Bank, BASIS.IO (Jun. 20, 2017),
https://www.basis.io/basis_whitepaper_en.pdf; Jordan Lee, Nu, NUBITS.COM
(Sep. 23, 2014), https://nubits.com/NuWhitepaper.pdf.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

2 BACKGROUND
A growing body of evidence suggests that stable cryptocurrencies may
play a role in the world economy. In 2018, the IMF estimated that 11
countries are at 20% or higher inflation.19 Using black market exchange
rates measured weekly, the Cato Institute’s Troubled Currencies Project
estimates that the real rates are significantly higher than the IMF
estimates.20 Currency devaluation is rampant in many countries, e.g.
Venezuela (2018: -99%), Argentina (2018: -53.2%), Turkey (2018: -
38.4%), and Brazil (2018: -20.6%).21 In the United States, transacting in
cash costs the consumer around 200 billion dollars annually - about $637
per person.22 The cost of cash is primarily associated with counting,
19 International Monetary Fund, Inflation Rate, Average Consumer Prices
Annual Percent Change, IMF DATA MAPPER,
https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/PCPIPCH@WEO/OEMDC/ADVEC/
WEOWORLD
20 Steve Hanke & Hal Boger, Inflation by the Decades: Full Dataset, CATO,
(2018), https://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/troubled-currencies-project-
site/inflation-by-the-decades-full-data-set.xlsx. According to the Troubled
Currencies Project, which is a joint project with Johns Hopkins University, six
countries are experiencing over 100% annual inflation. Id.
21 Brian Ellsworth & Girish Gupta, Venezuela Announce 99.6 Percent
Devaluation of Official Forex Rate, REUTERS (Feb. 5, 2018, 5:25 PM),
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-venezuela-economy/venezuela-announces-
99-6-percent-devaluation-of-official-forex-rate-idUSKBN1FP2WK; Sam
Meredith, Argentina’s Peso has Now Fallen 52% Against the Dollar this Year,
CNBC (Aug. 31, 2018), https://www.cnbc.com/2018/08/31/argentinas-peso-
has-fallen-108percent-against-the-dollar-so-far-this-year.html; Roger Aitken,
Turkish Lira ‘Currency Crisis’ Not Over, Could Hit 8 Against U.S. Dollar,
FORBES (Aug 16, 2018),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/rogeraitken/2018/08/16/turkish-lira-currency-
crisis-not-over-could-hit-8-against-u-s-dollar/#472187cd2301; Lise Alves, With
Depreciation of Currency, Brazilians Spend Less Abroad, THE RIO TIMES (Dec.
24, 2018), https://riotimesonline.com/brazil-news/rio-business/with-
depreciation-of-currency-brazilians-spend-less-abroad.
22 Jonathan Brugge, Olivier Denecker, Hamza Jawaid, Andras Kovacs, &
Ibrahim Shami, Attacking the Cost of Cash, MCKINSEY & COMPANY (Aug.
2018), https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-
insights/attacking-the-cost-of-cash.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
managing, storing, transporting, guarding, and accounting for bank
notes.23 The theft of cash alone costs U.S. retail businesses lose around
$40 billion annually.24 Similarly, according to one study, one in every
$12,400 of cash notes printed may be counterfeit.25 The effect of
corruption on economic welfare is significant.26 More corrupt countries
also experience significantly lower rates of investment in the respective
country.27 Corrupt countries are also subject to a significantly higher
inflation rate.28 Several studies demonstrate that the poor and those
23 Aleksander Berentsen and Fabian Schar, The Case for Central Bank Electronic
Money and the Non-case for Central Bank Cryptocurrencies, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, Second Quarter 2018, pp. 97-106.
https://doi.org/10.20955/r.2018.97-106.
24 Will Yaowicz, Cash Costs U.S. Businesses $40 Billion a Year,
https://www.inc.com/will-yakowicz/dealing-with-cash-costs-american-
businesses-55-billion.html (last visited April 24, 2019).
25 Costs of Keeping Ahead of Counterfeiters, FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF RICHMOND,
(December 2009), https://www.richmondfed.org/-
/media/richmondfedorg/banking/payments_services/understanding_payment
s/pdf/costs_counterfeiters.pdf; Ruth Judson and Richard Porter, Estimating
the Worldwide Volume of Counterfeit U.S. Currency: Data and Extrapolation,”
DIVISION OF MONETARY AFFAIRS, BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM,
(2003),
http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/FEDS/2003/200352/200352pap.pdf.
26 See Andrei Shleifer & Robert W. Vishny, Corruption, QUARTERLY JOURNAL
OF ECONOMICS, August 1993.
27 Aymo Brunetti, Greogory Kisunko & Beatrice Weder di Mauro, Credibility of
Rules and Economic Growth: Evidence from a Worldwide Survey of the Private
Sector, 12 WORLD BANK ECONOMIC REVIEW 353, 353-84 (1998); Aymo Brunetti &
Beatrice Weder di Mauro, Investment and Institutional Uncertainty: A
Comparative Study of Different Uncertainty Measures, 134 REVIEW OF WORLD
ECONOMICS 513, 513-33 (1998); Johann Graf Lambsdorff, How Corruption
Affects Productivity, 56 KYKLOS 457, 457-74 (2003);
28 Fahim Al-Marhubi, Export Diversivication and Growh: An Empirical
Investigation; 7 APPLIED ECONOMICS LETTERS 559, 559-62 (2000).
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

with less access to institutions bear a disproportionate share of these
costs of using cash.29
Cash and bank notes are gradually losing ground to other payment
systems.30 Whereas the overwhelming majority of humans live in cash
economies where at least 90% of transactions are conducted in cash,
consumers in wealthier economies tend to favor noncash alternatives.31
Cash usage in the United States, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands,
Sweden, Finland, Canada, France, among other industrialized nations, has
fallen well below 50% of total transaction volume.32 Most significantly,
in Northern Europe as few as one in every five transactions are made in
cash.33
Central banks and governments around the world have been
experimenting with government-sponsored digital and cryptocurrencies
since 2015.34 In the case of central banks, such experimentation is
29 Id.
30 KENNETH S. ROGOFF, THE CURSE OF CASH, (Princeton University Press, 2016);
Jonathan Brugge, Olivier Denecker, Hamza Jawaid, Andras Kovacs, & Ibrahim
Shami, Attacking the Cost of Cash, MCKINSEY & COMPANY (Aug. 2018),
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-
insights/attacking-the-cost-of-cash.
31 Id.
32 “Germany, Japan, and Austria stand apart as wealthy countries where
consumers maintain a strong preference for cash at the point of sale, despite
universal availability of electronic payments instruments and the broad adoption
of electronic transfers for recurring payments.” Id.
33 Id.
34 Dr. Garrick Hileman & Michel Rauchs, Global Cryptocurrency Benchmarking
Study, (2017), https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/faculty-
research/centres/alternative-finance/publications/global-
cryptocurrency/#.XMHF_xNKhTY; Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive
Board of the European Central Bank, at the Central Bank of Malaysia Monetary
Policy Conference (July 24, 2017)(transcript available
https://www.bis.org/review/r170807c.htm); Digital Currency Initiative, MIT
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
already close to launch35 or fully operational.36 Several governments
have issued their own digital currencies. Most major tech companies in
the private sector have been experimenting with cryptocurrency projects
since 2017. Examples include Tunisia (eDinar),37 Venezuela (Petro),38
MEDIA LAB, https://dci.mit.edu/; Financial Statbility Review 2017, MONETARY
AUTHORITY OF SINGAPORE, http://www.mas.gov.sg/Regulations-and-Financial-
Stability/Financial-Stability/2017/Financial-Stability-Review-2017.aspx; Jack
Meaning, Ben Dyson, James Barker & Emily Clayton, Broadening narrow
money: monetary policy with a central bank digital currency, (Bank of England,
Staff Working Paper No. 724, May 2018); J.P. Koning, Fedcoin: A Central Bank-
Issued Cryptocurrency, R3 REPORT 15 (2016); Sina Motamedi, Will Bitcoins Ever
Become Money? A Path to Decentralized Central Banking, TANNUTUVA.ORG (July
21, 2014), https://tannutuva.org/2014/will-bitcoins-ever-become-money-a-
path-to-decentralized-central-banking/.
35 The Bank of Canada and bank of England announced in 2016 that the
technology was not ready for a central bank sponsored crypto currency. Yet,
other central banks, such as in Singapore and Sweden have already launched
their e-currency projects. Morten Bech & Rodney Garratt, Central Bank
Cryptocurrencies, BIS QUARTERLY REVIEW 66-67, September 2017, available
at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3041906.
36 Usman W. Chohan, Cryptocurrencies as Asset-Backed Instruments: The
Venezuelan Petro, (February 7, 2018), available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3119606. Venezuela’s oil token. Bruce Zagaris, U.S.
Bans Venezuela’s New Crypto-Currency and Adds 3 Officials to Sanctions List,
34 No. 4 INT'L ENFORCEMENT L. REP. 157, 157-161 (2018); Julie Hirschfeld Davis &
Nathaniel Popper, White House Bans Venezuela’s Digital Currency and Expands
Sanctions, THE NEW YORK TIMES, (March 19, 2018),
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/19/world/americas/trump-venezuela-
sanctions-petro.html.
37 Richard Kastelein, Tunisia to Replace Its National Digital Currency, eDinar,
With Blockchain-Driven Monetas Currency, BLOCKCHAIN NEWS (Dec. 28,
2015), https://www.the-blockchain.com/2015/12/28/tunisia-to-replace-its-
national-digital-currency-edinar-with-blockchain-driven-monetas-currency/
38 Ryan Browne, Venezuela About to Pre-Sell ‘Petro’ Cryptocurrency, and
Other Countries Could Follow, CNBC (Feb. 19, 2018),
https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/19/venezuela-petro-cryptocurrency-pre-sale-
starts-february-20.html
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

Senegal (eCFA),39 Sweden (eKrona),40 Dubai (EmCash),41 Japan (Jcoin),42
and Estonia (Estcoin),43 and Ecuador,44 among others.45
Several factors explain such early experimentation in the public sector.
The end of technological life cycles of legacy systems and associated
emerging trends in payment systems necessitate central banks’
enhanced examination of cryptocurrency solutions.46 Central banks in
39 Samburaj Das, Senegal Will Introduce a Blockchain-Based National Digital
Currency, CCN (Nov. 28, 2016), https://www.ccn.com/senegal-will-introduce-
blockchain-based-national-digital-currency
40 Afraid of a few commercial entities controlling cash supply in Sweden, the
Swedish central bank has kicked off its digital currency project e-krona.
Amanda Billner, Now There are Plans for ‘e-Krona’ in Cash-Shy Sweden,
BLOOMBERG, (Oct. 26, 2018, 2:25 AM CDT),
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-10-26/riksbank-to-develop-
pilot-electronic-currency-amid-cash-decline
41 Jon Buck, Dubai Will Issue First Ever State Cryptocurreny, COIN
TELEGRAPH (Oct. 1, 2017), https://cointelegraph.com/news/dubai-will-issue-
first-ever-state-cryptocurrency.
42 Arjun Kharpal, Japanese Banks Are Thinking of Making Their Own
Cryptocurrency Called the J-Coin, CNBC: TECH TRANSFORMERS (Sep. 27,
2017), https://www.cnbc.com/2017/09/27/japanese-banks-cryptocurrency-j-
coin.html.
43 Kaspar Korjus, We’re Planning to Launch Estcoin – and That’s Only the
Start, MEDIUM (Dec. 18, 2017), https://medium.com/e-residency-blog/were-
planning-to-launch-estcoin-and-that-s-only-the-start-310aba7f3790.
44 Everett Rosenfeld, Ecuador Becomes the First County to Roll Out Its Own
Digital Cash, CNBC: CURRENCIES (Feb. 9, 2015),
https://www.cnbc.com/2015/02/06/ecuador-becomes-the-first-country-to-roll-
out-its-own-digital-durrency.html.
45 Cryptocurrencies by Country, THOMPSON REUTERS (Oct. 25, 2017),
https://blogs.thomsonreuters.com/answerson/world-cryptocurrencies-country
46 Morten Bech & Rodney Garratt, Central Bank Cryptocurrencies, BIS QUARTERLY
REVIEW 66-67, September 2017, available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3041906.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
countries with rapidly declining cash usage47 are subject to the most
pressure to find solutions for bank note alternatives.
The private sector also continually engages in cryptocurrency
experimentation. Most cryptocurrency exchanges are creating their own
stable cryptocurrency.48 On February 14 2019, J.P. Morgan introduced
the first prototype of its blockchain settlement product: JPM Coin, a
stable cryptocurrency backed one-to-one by JPM’s fiat currency
reserves.49 Finally, Facebook is developing a stable cryptocurrency in an
attempt to break into the financial services business.50
47 Jonathan Brugge, Olivier Denecker, Hamza Jawaid, Andras Kovacs, &
Ibrahim Shami, Attacking the Cost of Cash, MCKINSEY & COMPANY (Aug.
2018), https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-
insights/attacking-the-cost-of-cash.
48 Jeff John Roberts, Cryptocurrency Exchanges Back $32 Million Stable Coin
Project, FORTUNE (Aug. 29, 2018),
http://fortune.com/2018/08/29/cryptocurrency-exchanges-back-32-million-
stable-coin-project; Julie Verhage, Crypto Exchange Coinbase to List Stable
Coin Backed by Circle, BLOOMBERG (Oct. 23, 2018),
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-10-23/crypto-exchange-
coinbase-to-list-stable-coin-backed-by-circle.
49 Michelle Davis & Alastair Marsh, JPMorgan to Use Digital Coin to Speed
Up Corporate Payments, BLOOMBERG (Feb. 14, 2019),
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-02-14/jpmorgan-to-use-
cryptocurrency-for-payments-business-cnbc-says.
50 Sarah Frier & Julie Verhage, Facebook is Developing a Cryptocurrency for
WhatsApp Transfers, Sources Say, BLOOMBERG (Dec. 20, 2018, 6:35 PM
CST),https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-12-21/facebook-is-said-
to-develop-stablecoin-for-whatsapp-transfers; Nathanial Popper & Mike Isaac,
Facebook and Telegram Are Hoping to Succeed Where Bitcoin Failed, THE
NEW YORK TIMES, (Feb. 28, 2019),
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/28/technology/cryptocurrency-facebook-
telegram.html.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

The rise of an early stable cryptocurrency design, Tether, in terms of its
total market capitalization, 51 its stability around $1 value, 52 and
investors’ uses of Tether as a temporary safe haven,53 provides some
support for stable cryptocurrencies’ ability to create market stability,
even if only temporarily. Like all other stable cryptocurrency projects,
Tether is still afflicted with significant design challenges.54
The total volume of stable cryptocurrencies relative to the rest of the
cryptocurrency market is growing consistently. The growth of stable
cryptocurrencies can largely be traced back to attempts to combine the
utility and benefits of cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology with
remedies for the existing fluctuation and volatility in the cryptocurrency
markets.55 The growth data suggests that demand for products that help
manage the volatility inherent in other crypto assets is likely to continue
to increase.56
51 COINMARKETCAP: TETHER, https://coinmarketcap.com/currencies/tether (last
visited Apr 22, 2019).
52 Johnson Gitonga, What is Tether (USDT) and How to Buy It?, YAHOO!:
FINANCE (Feb. 5, 2018), https://finance.yahoo.com/news/tether-usdt-buy-
090742535.html to evidence on how stable Tether is at $1 value.
53 Evidence that shows that investors move crypto assets into Tether when the
market gets more volatile.
54 Tether’s issue with being pegged against the US$ and with that subject to
Centralized monetary policy. Andrea Tan, Eric Lam & Benjamin Robertson,
Crypto Markets Roiled as Traders Question Tether’s Dollar Peg, BLOOMBERG,
(October 14, 2018, 11:30 PM CDT),
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-10-15/dollar-peg-that-
underpins-20-of-crypto-trades-is-under-pressure.
55 Stablecoin, BINANCE ACADEMY,
https://www.binance.vision/glossary/stablecoin (last visited Apr. 24, 2019).
56 BINANCE RESEARCH, Ever-increasing Volume: Contribution of Stablecoin
Volume to Total Industry Volume, in Can JPM Coin Disrupt the Existing
Stablecoin Market? at 4, (Mar. 1, 2019),
https://info.binance.com/en/research/marketresearch/img/BinanceResearch-
JPMCoin.pdf.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

Based on the current information provided by J.P. Morgan, JPM Coin might be a direct competitor to
Ripple, which currently has a lead in this industry with over 100 institutional clients3 for its
blockchain-powered alternative to SWIFT4.
Fiat-collateralized stablecoins have primarily the following features:
- Serving as fiat on/off ramps: for institutional investors, they collateralize their USD assets to
​
stablecoins before transferring on a wide variety of exchanges.
- Stable prices: owing to the pegging system, it is convenient to trade stablecoins with other
​
digital assets. Fiat-backed stablecoins are especially popular in OTC trading.
- Easy to apprehend: unlike algorithmic stablecoins, investors have more confidence in the
​
fiat-based pegging mechanismS aTsA iBtL iEs CmRoYrPeT iOnCtuUiRtiRvEeN tCoIE aSp prehend. The break in the peg of
some algorithmic stablecoins has made it difficult for institutional investors to consider these
assets as low-risk as fiat-pegged stablecoins.
Ever-increasing Volume: Contribution of Stablecoin Volume to Total Industry
Volume
The total share of stablecoin volume continues to increase relative to total volume across the entire
cryptoasset market, which reflects increasing demand to manage volatility inherent in other
cryptoassets.
3 FIRST ORDER PRINCIPLES FOR STABLE
2. Stablecoin Market Structure
CRYPTOCURRENCIES
Several common denominators allow for the identification of First Order
3 https://www.cnbc.com/2017/10/10/ripple-has-over-100-clients-as-mainstream-finance-warms-to-blockchain.html
P 4 ​ ​ hrtitnpsc:/i/pwwlews.in vfeostro pesdtiaa.cbomle/a rcticrlyesp/pteorsconualr-frineanncce/y0.5 05F1o5/hlloow-wswiinft-gsy sttehme-w oqrkus.aasnp tity theory of
money, we discuss how a currency can be designed to maintain a stable
store of value through the mechanisms of minting and burning money,
transaction taxes vs. holding taxes, and repegging. Most importantly,
good governance principles are crucial for every aspect of instituting any
long-term stable currency due to inevitable changes in the market and
the fundamental obstacle represented by the Folk Theorems of game
theory.
3.1 CURRENCY MINTING AND BURNING
The principle idea for creating a stable currency is to use the quantity
theory of money (QTM) to determine when and how to print and destroy
money.
First there needs to be the notion of a currency’s value relative to some
ideal stable value. This stable value is most commonly specified by a
consumer price index (CPI), though most existing stable coins have
chosen the USD as their measure of stable value. This choice of index of
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

stable value is called the peg. The goal of a stable coin can be a tight peg
or loose (within a range of values), fixed or floating (the value can raise
or drop within specified rate limits). For simplicity, we will confine our
discussion to analyzing a loose fixed peg. For concreteness we assume
the target value of the currency is fixed on the USD and allowed to range
10% in value from $0.90 to $1.10.
QTM dictates that minting twice as much currency will halve its price,
and burning half of the existing currency will double its price. This
mechanism can then theoretically stabilize the price of a currency. If the
price of the currency rises to $1.10 as measured by averaging its value
on currency exchanges, then minting 10% more currency and releasing it
to the market will lower the price to $1; if the price of the currency drops
to $0.90, then burning 10% of the currency will raise the price to $1. The
relevant equation relating the price 𝑃 and the quantity of money 𝑀 is
𝑃𝑀 = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡
which is derived from the classical equation of exchange.
Such calculations are only valid in the ideal. In practice, the scheme’s
success depends on how the money is printed and distributed or burned.
3.1.1 Minting
The minting of coins requires many choices. For example, there needs to
be protocols for deciding the following: 1. What is the margin around the
peg? 2. How is the value measured (presumably an average of currency
exchange indices)? 3. When and how often is the value of the coin
measured (presumably a running average, but specifying this average
determines how forex traders will react); 4. How much is printed in
response to the price exceeding the margin (do you mint the price
dictated by the static QTM, or do you take into account the rate of
change of the price)? 5. How is the newly minted money distributed (is it
given algorithmically to specific members of the stable coin network, or
sold to the market by a DAO created for that purpose, given to a
charitable group, etc.)?
For instance, the plan for Basis stable coin was to mint new coins when
the price was high and distribute them to their shareholders, which
would theoretically sell them immediately on the market to get the best
price. However, it is possible the shareholders would collude to drive the
price up by holding their new money, in which case the mechanism
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
would automatically print more, benefitting the colluders. There are
many ways to combat such tactics, such as diversifying the shareholders,
or automatically selling the new coins on the market then giving the
shareholders the results.
At this point it is crucial to recognize a fundamental fact encapsulated in
the Folk Theorems of game theory57. No matter how complicated the
protocols become for creating a stable coin, there are strategies that a
powerful and patient player can use to subvert the system to profit at
the expense of the group. This means a nimble and responsive
governance process is required for any such stable coin scheme, because
the rules must always be ready to be adjusted to respond to the changing
conditions of the market.
3.1.2 Burning
When the price of the currency is lower than the peg, QTM dictates that
currency should be destroyed, i.e., burned, to raise the price. Two broad
approaches for burning money is to sell bonds or sell reserves, then burn
the proceeds of the sale. These mechanisms should be used to address
the two broad reasons a currency may temporarily lose value: larger
economic instability and hot money.
3.1.2.1 Bonds
Bonds should be used to address a temporary larger economic instability
which lowers a currency’s price--due to an act of God, for instance, or
war. A bond is a new type of token, separate from the currency token. A
bond token may be minted and sold at a price lower than its future
redemption value. For example, if the price of the currency is at $0.90,
then enough bonds can be sold so that 10% of the currency is raised in
the sale. Then this currency will be burned, raising the price temporarily
to $1. At some future time the bonds will be redeemed for a higher price
than they were sold, hopefully when the economy rebounds. If the
economy does not improve, this action will fail and another mechanism
must be employed, such as a new raft of bonds, or taxes, or a repeg of
the currency, depending on the cause of the instability. (The reasons for
57 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Folk_theorem_(game_theory) Retrieved
6/4/2019.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

employing the taxes and repegging mechanisms will be discussed
below.)
For instance, the plan for Basis was to mint bonds when the price was
low and repay the bonds automatically when the currency price rose
above the margin with the first newly minted coins. According to our
simulations, this scheme will succeed as long as demand for the currency
is growing at a sufficient rate, but it will fail if the demand is stagnant at
equilibrium. The financial instrument represented by Basis-type bond is
a very complicated option, technically a one-touch up-and-in Asian
barrier option with no expiration. Under an assumption of constant
demand, this option’s value has high variation, making it expensive and
inefficient to sell. More generally, since the bonds would sell at a price
lower than they were redeemed, the bond queue would grow without
bound, leading to lower prices for the bonds and a positive feedback loop
which would lead to a death spiral and the failure of the peg.
This cartoon description of the Basis mechanism under the constant
demand assumption demonstrates that bonds should only be used in the
case when there is a larger force at work, which is temporarily dropping
the economy, so that in the future, when the economy has rebounded,
bonds can safely be paid off. The expense of bonds in this case is justified
by the preventing the costs associated with temporary instability. We
also recommend following the example of historical central banks, in
minting bonds with fixed expiration so price discovery is more efficient.
A nimble and responsive governance process is again required in order
to recognize when the economy is experiencing a temporary instability
in the market in order to decide to mint bonds.
3.1.2.2 Reserves
Reserves are necessary to address the instability of a currency due to hot
money. Hot money is money that is frequently transferred between
institutions or currencies in order to maximize gain in interest or capital.
For instance, the hot money from speculation is the leading
contemporary cause of instability in cryptocurrencies. As speculators
move money from bitcoin to ether, e.g., bitcoin’s price drops and ether’s
price rises.
Most of the value of contemporary cryptocurrencies comes from
speculation on the future use of cryptocurrencies for basic service
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
transactions that do not currently exist. Therefore the vast majority of
cryptocurrencies are technically hot money. The best way to prevent
price fluctuations due to hot money is to use reserves.
A reserve of foreign currencies and/or assets is collected by a mechanism
in the cryptocurrency design when the price goes beyond the upper
margin, in this example $1.10. The manner in which this is handled
depends on the design. MakerDAO has a complicated mechanism of
individual encumbrance and algorithmic enforcement. For the purposes
of this article we will discuss a conceptually simpler mechanism used, for
instance, by Reserve stable coin and most national currencies. This latter
mechanism uses QTM to mint new coins when the price is above $1.10
and sells them at market for USD (hypothetically). The USD is then held
liquid in reserve in anticipation of a drop in the price of the
cryptocurrency. When the cryptocurrency price reaches $0.90, then
enough cryptocurrency is bought with the reserve USD, theoretically
10% of the currency in existence, which is then burned.
In this toy model assuming an ideal QTM situation, it is easy to calculate
the cost of defending against hot money with the reserve mechanism. In
the next paragraph we demonstrate the obvious result that selling the
currency when the price is high to build a reserve, then buying the
currency back with the reserve when the price is low will yield an
arbitrage profit. This holds under the following two assumptions: 1. The
reserve currency is more stable than the base currency, and 2. The cost
to implement and maintain the reserve is ignored.
Under the quantity theory of money the price 𝑃 and the quantity of
money 𝑀 satisfy
𝑃𝑀 = 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 = 𝐶
If there are 𝑀 = 1000 currency tokens in existence when the price rises
above 𝑃 = $1.10 we have 𝐶 = 1100(𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠∗$) so minting 100 new
tokens restabilizes 𝑃 at
𝑃 = 𝐶/𝑀 = 1100(𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠∗$)/1100 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠 = $1
Now assuming the 100 newly minted tokens were sold at $1.10 the
reserve then has $110 USD. Then when the price drops to $0.90 when
hot money exits the currency, we buy tokens with the reserve USD.
Before purchase, our 1100 tokens at $0.90 gives 𝐶 as
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

𝑃𝑀 = 𝐶 = 990(𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠∗$)
so buying and burning 110 tokens (which was 10% of the previous total
𝑀) gives us anew 𝑀 = 990 so the new 𝑃 must be 𝑃 = $1.
Notice that this purchase of 110 tokens at $0.90 requires $99 USD, so our
reserve finishes by holding $110−$99 = $11 > 0 more than at the
beginning.
This shows that maintaining a reserve can defend against the instability
due to hot money. The argument assumes 1. the reserve is held in a
currency or other asset with stable value, and 2. the price of
maintenance for the reserve is not more than the profit that can be
achieved in the arbitrage. The first requirement leads to a criticism of the
MakerDAO protocol (e.g.), the second requirement leads to a criticism of
the Reserve protocol (e.g.).
3.1.2.3 Hot Money Ratio
The assumption of many stable coin designs is that a 100% reserve must
be maintained to guarantee the peg will hold. This is due to a basic
argument from economics, used by Soros to break the Bank of England,
that a currency not fully backed by reserves can theoretically be shorted
until its peg is broken to achieve an arbitrage profit.
On the contrary, we argue that a 100% reserve is not always necessary,
as is the case with any currency which has an intrinsic worth. At
minimum, e.g., a national currency has the intrinsic worth represented
by the confidence gained from the ability to pay taxes. A cryptocurrency
would have intrinsic worth if there are genuine economic transactions
that are reliably being performed with its tokens—especially if there are
auditable investments which encumber the value in the token. Soros was
not able to break the Bank of England because it wasn’t fully backed with
foreign reserves, but because the British pound was being pegged at a
value that was inauthentic.
In fact no nation holds anything near to a 100% reserve for the obvious
reason that it would be too expensive to have a large liquid reserve. The
US foreign reserve, e.g., is less than 2% of its money.
Holding any liquid reserve is a loss of opportunity cost that is a type of
economic friction its users must subsidize, explicitly in transaction taxes
which transparently pay for maintenance of the peg, or implicitly in
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
holding taxes which bearers of the currency pay, usually through
inflation.
Therefore determining the fraction of a currency that is hot money is
necessary for efficient defense of its stability. A currency that
overestimates this hot money ratio will cost more to use. A currency that
underestimates the ratio will be insecure. The tension between these
two values of efficiency and security motivates a careful estimate of the
hot money ratio.
Contemporarily, we estimate that virtually all cryptocurrency is used for
speculation and is therefore hot money and therefore needs to be
backed fully. But a well-designed stable coin should anticipate the future
when it is used for more authentic economic activity.
3.1.2.4 The Energy of Money
The authors are researching the creation of such a hot money index, by
studying what we call the energy of money. We begin with the classical
equation of exchange from QTM
𝑀𝑉 = Π𝑄
Here Π= 1/P is the price level, and 𝑄 is the real value of aggregate
expenditures. We think of 𝑄 as the momentum of the economy. 𝑉 is the
classical velocity of money, which is much easier to evaluate with
blockchain cryptocurrencies than national fiat currencies, since every
transaction on blockchain gives fully transparent publicly-available
information on the exchange of money. Demand is classically defined as
𝐷 ≔𝑀𝑃 which is analogous to the mass of the economy. Demand 𝐷
represents the aggregate of all market demand for the currency for
purposes of using it in business transactions and holding it as a store of
value for anticipated future use and insurance.58 The analogy with the
kinetic theory of gases guides much of our thinking on how to evaluate
58 Cf., Milton Friedman, “A Theoretical Framework for Monetary
Analysis”, NBER Occasional Paper 112, National Bureau of Economic
Research, Columbia University Press, 1971.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

the efficacy of these quantities as guides to understanding the hot
money ratio.
We define energy as 𝐸 ≔ 𝑄𝑉. Notice the equation of exchange give us
𝑄 = 𝐷𝑉 and, thereby, the identity 𝐸 = 𝐷𝑉@. The sum of the changes in
the volume of transactions times their displacements, or the work it took
to bring the system from 0 value to its current state of volume and
velocity, is the energy of the system:
𝑊 ≔ B𝐹𝑑𝑋≔B𝑑𝑄∙𝑉 =:𝐸
Here the work integral is formally defined in the previous line: the force
𝐹 is formally the derivative of the momentum 𝐹 =𝑑𝑄/𝑑𝑡 and 𝑋 is the
“position of money”, formally the integral of the velocity of money. All
this formality is used to draw out the analogy with mechanics. The sum
of the changes in the volume of transactions times their displacements
is the energy of the network. The sum of all the changes in value and
rates of transactions in moving from 0 to the current state gives the total
energy, potential and kinetic, of the economy. 59 Under the assumption
59 We are thinking of the energy of an economy in very physical terms of
baskets of goods exchanging hands at a certain rate. Following this
tangent is beyond the scope of this article, and not directly useful for
estimating the confidence we have in an economy, but it may be worth
explaining our personal perspective briefly in a footnote. We imagine the
baskets of goods quite literally, and the velocity of money represents these
baskets of goods changing hands. The energy of an economy is therefore
precisely related to the energy that farmers, miners, industrialists and all
other kinds of workers spend in bringing us to our current economic state.
These workers’ energy can ultimately be traced back to the sun--all plant
and animal energy obviously comes pretty directly from the sun, and all
our petrochemical fossil fuels come from sequestered plant energy that
originally came from the sun. The literal basket of goods (food, fuel,
lumber, iron ingots, etc.) is therefore energetically measurable. This
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
of conservation of energy, the network would not lose or gain confidence
value (energy) without accounting for the loss through conversion of
value to or from other forms.
With clearly specified definitions of energy we can discuss “frictions” in
an economy due to inefficiencies, and we can distinguish “genuine”
versus “artificial” network energy to guard against the instability arising
from hot money.
3.2 TRANSACTION TAXES VS. HOLDING TAXES
Regardless of the specific protocols that are chosen to attempt to
maintain a stable store of value, there are frictions in an economy which
must be accounted. In a primitive economy the degradation of the assets
in time, such as food spoilage or housing deterioration, are a natural fact
that must be accounted. Currency can enable more efficient transactions
which prevent the loss of value by degradation via the matching of the
coincidence of wants before degradation can occur. Any remaining
inefficiencies account for some of the result of inflation. Another cause
of inflation is the cost of maintaining the coins. In the case of national
fiat paper currencies, we must account for the cost of producing the
cash, transporting it, and guarding it against counterfeit. In the case of
cryptocurrencies, we must account for the significant cost of maintaining
the nodes which create and store the electronic ledgers, redundantly to
achieve decentralization, permanently to prove autonomy.
Maintenance of the stability of the coin ultimately requires accounting
for all inefficiencies in the economy.
Transaction taxes should account for the inefficiencies that result from
maintaining the coins. Transaction taxes are fees on transfers of
ownership of the coins, e.g., sales taxes. In a blockchain cryptocurrency,
transaction taxes should match the cost of running the network, i.e., the
cost required to incentivize a sufficient number of nodes to operate in
order to maintain the level of decentralization desired, along with the
cost required to maintain the stability of the coin (through the
perspective is illustrated at length in Vaclav Smil, Energy and
Civilization: A History, MIT Press, 2017.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

maintenance described above for minting (typically insignificant) and
burning (typically significant)).
Holding taxes are typically the implicit result of inflation. Whenever the
coin loses value relative to an ideal CPI, the holders of the coin are
bearing the cost. Holding taxes should account for the inefficiencies of
the economy, instead of the inefficiencies of the maintenance of the
currency.
Ideally a good governance mechanism will be able to sagely judge how
much of the inefficiencies of the system are due to the economy versus
the maintenance of the currency, and implement the taxes
appropriately.
In the contemporary climate, however, these taxes or fees are not likely
to be implemented appropriately. In the zeal of the early development
of the internet, large companies which profit from the increased
efficiencies of this new communication medium tacitly bear the burden
of maintaining most of the nodes. This has led to a culture surrounding
the internet where users expect free service from the nodes. The costs
of running an honest internet node are hidden from consumers since the
information derived from running a node and the security of knowing
their website is secure are more valuable than the costs of providing the
public service. Most likely this culture will continue to the decentralized
economy, where blockchain users will expect 0 transaction fees but will
probably not notice holding fees below 3% annual, which are instituted
implicitly by pegging to USD which has a similar inflation target.
3.3 REPEGGING
Regardless of how well the system is designed, there is always the
possibility that the fundamentals of the economy will change. This is
pithily encapsulated by the term “black swan events”.
For any long-lived currency a major shift in the perception of the value
of a currency is at some point inevitable; a shift that is not accounted
for by a reserve defending against hot money fluctuations or bonds
defending against temporary instability in the larger economy. When
such an event occurs, the currency could attempt to soldier along and
use its taxes mechanisms to attempt to restabilize its value at the peg,
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
but it is more efficient to repeg the currency after discovering its more
accurate value.
3.4 GOVERNANCE
3.4.1 Features Subject to Monetary and Fiscal Policy
As stressed throughout this chapter, governance of the decision-making
body plays a crucial role in the stability design. The stability mechanism
can be entirely automated in the day-to-day functioning of the network,
employing a predetermined algorithm. However, monetary and fiscal
policy choices cannot be fully automated. The parameters for the
algorithm must be chosen by hand and adjusted regularly to balance
security with maximal efficiency in response to network performance.
Such choices need to be made by a decentralized autonomous
organization, which we call the Stability DAO or SDAO.
The SDAO is a type of transparent, decentralized, open analog of the US
Federal Reserve that ensures that the system maintains its decentralized
nature. The SDAO is mandated to continually improve the function of the
stable cryptocurrency. The SDAO enables full transparency of policy
decision making, stable cryptocurrency-specific monetary and fiscal
policy decisions. Moreover, the SDAO determines artificial bond token
price floor to ensure SDAO does not borrow excessively in attempt to
limit stable cryptocurrency supply.
The SDAO is needed for multiple oracle functions that enable a fully
decentralized stability model. The decentralized oracle function of the
SDAO includes establishing the specific sources and weights for
averaging the information from exchanges, assessment of how often this
information is sampled, determination of the specific length of time over
which the information is sampled and averaged to determine the price.
Some of the other core functions of the SDAO are reviewed here. What
are the specific conditions which dictate when the stable cryptocurrency
or bonds are minted, how many stable cryptocurrency coins or bonds are
minted, how long auctions are open, and when and how do we stop the
bond queue or minting process? When and how is the price repegged in
the face of black swan events? In the event of long-term stagnation in
demand, when and how should a transaction tax or holding tax be
implemented in response to the respective inefficiencies of the network
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

and the economy? When and how are reserves built, used, and
maintained? How much of the network transactions are due to hot
money versus authentic economic uses of the currency? What specific
types of foreign reserves of currency or assets are used? How much of
them are liquid? Who profits from the maintenance of the reserve, how,
and when? Finally, the SDAO decides when to implement research
supporting the mandate of maximizing stability and efficiency. The SDAO
must continually adjust these choices, to balance security with maximal
efficiency in response to network performance.
3.4.2 Communication Design
How decisions are made to the questions posed above depends crucially
on the quality of information that the governing body has at its
command. Governance design determines how information is
communicated in a group, since the allocation of power determines who
has a voice at what time.
Taking inspiration from engineering, the goal of communication design
is to amplify the signal while filtering the noise. Centralized hierarchical
systems more naturally lead to strong noise filters, which likely lead to
filtering/ignoring the information signals at the edge. Decentralized flat
organizations have a tendency to fail from the inverse quality of
amplifying the noise at the edge, so that important information cannot
find its champion to lead to useful action. Finding the right balance must
be a conscious choice.
One of the major differences between centralized and decentralized
structures is transparency. Centralized organizations tend to have
opaque governance, hiding their decisions, decision making, and even
their decision-making process. Decentralized organizations have a much
greater tendency toward transparency.
Transparency has distinct advantages and disadvantages for monetary
policy. For instance, a currency partially backed by reserves can be
successfully arbitraged by Soros’ shorting strategy much easier if the
quantity of reserves is known.
3.4.3 Ultimate Power
Many choices must ultimately be made about how to specifically design
the governance protocols of the SDAO. How will power over decision
making be distributed, i.e., as the system progresses in time, who will be
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
rewarded with more power and who will be punished with loss of
power? Secondly, who changes the rules governing the day-to-day
functioning of the currency, and who changes the rules governing how
to change the rules? The first question concerns executive governance
and the second addresses legislative governance. These are extremely
deep questions that have plagued every human organization that has
ever existed. However, blockchain technology gives us new tools for
anonymity, transparency, and permanency of records that can enable
fully decentralized governance, while maintaining privacy, distributing
power justly60 and efficiently, and preventing censorship.
Even a partial investigation of the answers is too involved to contain
here, but we refer the reader to our paper discussing on-chain
governance design.61 In that paper we recommend an SDAO design
coordinated through reputation-weighted democratic governance. The
core objective of the governance design is to create the proper incentives
that help independent and selfish actors to be organized and to
collaborate productively towards a common goal. From a quite
pragmatic perspective, addressing precise choices of parameters in
algorithmic token design, the paper identifies which choices relate to
which values a group may preference. As a simple example, the profits
of a DAO must be chosen to be distributed in some ratio with the
members who do the present work which garners the profit, members
who have previously done such work which built the reputation of the
DAO, members who designed the protocols for how to do the work, and
with members who designed the governance structure which initiated
the DAO. The choice of distribution weights which determines how much
each of these 4 groups shares in the profit should match the current
60 Justice is defined as the allocation of power to those who can best use
it to profit the group. This definition is created in concert with the
definition of corruption given above, as behavior that profits a minority
group or individual at the greater expense of the majority.
61 Craig Calcaterra, On-Chain Governance of Decentralized
Autonomous Organizations, (May 2018), available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3188374.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

values of the DAO. A greater share for new workers will attract new
workers, a greater share for the older workers will signal long-term
stability, while a greater share for the protocol designers will attract
more innovation.
In the context of the SDAO, the governance design enables the SDAO to
identify the ideal protocols for selecting and promoting its values and
monetary policy goals. At the same time, the on-chain governance design
allows the SDAO to achieve complete decentralization while preserving
anonymity.
3.4.4 Transcendental Values
Finally, we repeat the idea that the Folk Theorems of game theory prove
that it is impossible to create protocols, no matter how complex or well-
engineered, which can eliminate corruption. Corruption is defined as
behavior that profits a minority group or individual at the greater
expense of the majority. No static set of rules can prevent the corruption
that will eventually lead to the failure of any stability design. But a
changing set of rules can prevent such failure. A nimble governance
design can react to and prevent corruption if it devotes enough resources
to rewarding such efforts.
The Folk Theorems prove that governance protocols can never be final;
rules must continually change in order to react to and anticipate changes
in the market and the players’ behavior. Therefore, for long-term
stability, a group must be organized around a transcendental value that
guides the members’ behavior. By transcendental value, we mean a
value that cannot be specified or contained within with a logical set of
rules, but that is nevertheless a goal that is meaningful and can be held
in common by the group. A very limited list of examples of
transcendental values guiding groups of the past include: harmony,
individual rights, equality, equity, beauty, fairness, truth, and “don’t be
evil”. Such values are often in tension, such as harmony vs. individual
rights such as free speech, or equality of opportunity (freedom of
competition) vs. equality of outcomes (equity). Transcendental values
have guided every human organization, religious or secular, for the very
reason that they are required by the Folk Theorems to maintain stability
as people inevitably discover circumventions to the transcendent
intentions behind the explicit and mundane rules.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

STABLE CRYPTOCURRENCIES
An organization’s values can help harmonize the group in decisions on
previously unanticipated behavior, so that the group can efficiently and
effectively punish or reward the action, immediately or retroactively.
Clear expressions of an organization’s values, commonly held, are
essential for the design, redesign, and implementation of any
governance structure, but such values are far more important in
decentralized organizations, which inherently have less motivational
structure than centralized hierarchies.
4 CONCLUSION
Stable cryptocurrency designs will play increasingly important roles in
the evolution of decentralized economies. They can establish and
support core functions that are currently sub-optimally provided in the
centralized economies and emerging markets. First Order Principles
identify common core design factors for stable cryptocurrencies. The
mathematical models and substantive coded implementations of First
Order Principles are continually evolving.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3402701

