Chapter ) – Eight Institutions 1
Eight Institutions for the Evolution of
Decentralization
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
Chapter ) discusses the core problems Web4 companies need to solve in order to
achieve progress for the decentralized economy. The electrical revolution took more
than a century to come to fruition, because of the need to develop uniform standards
for production, transmission, storage, and utilization. Similarly, the Web4 vision of up-
grading the entire global economy requires core infrastructure products to be created
simultaneously, and be integrated with each other.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Chapter 9. Eight institutions
Before the vision of a radically decentralized economy can be achieved, engineers
and architects need to solve eight big problems that business solved centuries ago. All
eight problems need to be solved simultaneously, and the solutions need to be inte-
grated with each other.
This is similar to the electrical revolution that took more than a century to come
to fruition, because of the need to develop uniform standards for production, trans-
mission, storage, and utilization. But in the FGGHs the electrification of cities made the
revolution seem to miraculously appear from nowhere. The Web4 vision of revolu-
tionizing the entire global economy makes the electrical revolution seem trivial.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782205

2 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Eight Institutions
Engineers have managed to prototype two of the solutions: decentralized cur-
rency (Bitcoin) and the distributed computing needed to make smart contracts
(Ethereum). We’re still missing most of them. The legal system, the political system,
the media, banking, and other services are all needed before the first DAO will be a
genuinely profitable addition to our economy.
All of these institutions will be improved, in effectiveness and efficiency, due to
the benefits of transparency and liquidity provided by decentralizing their power
structures. These eight institutions are necessary for business. Business grinds to a
halt without them, but they require a tiny fraction of the resources in the economy
when they are running well. It is only corruption that leads them to be perceived as
leaching from the economy. Well-designed systems eliminate those economic fric-
tions.
A dynamic design with checks and balances and the incentive design insights of
game theory are necessary to keep these networks running productively. The archi-
tecture guiding one institution can be reasonably ported to many other DAOs with
superficial changes.
The dream of full decentralization is an extreme democracy with autonomous in-
dividuals contributing the resources necessary to maintain the organization of the
community. Powerful and truly decentralized organizations are now possible, thanks
to advances in
Digital information storage, which allows each person to be the authoritative
holders of the entire organization’s history. No centralized authority is needed to be
in charge of the record.
Data processing (computation) allows each person to equally participate in filter-
ing and curating the information.
Networked communication from the internet allows each member of the organi-
zation to immediately connect with every other member on the globe. Complete bu-
reaucratic transparency is possible as global communication is speedy and affordable.
Cryptographic tools guarantee security, privacy, and power over personal infor-
mation.
Distributed computing architectures give security and transparency in establish-
ing network uniformity.
Whenever a healthy decentralized organization in the past began to earn money,
it quickly devolved to a centralized institution. Their ideals shifted from the transcen-
dental value which originally united them to a desire for money. Without the previous
equalizing ideal to moderate, the competition generated by the profit motive led in-
evitably to the organization centralizing with rigid rules for who has power and wealth.
The largest and most decentralized organizations of the present are non-profit (e.g.,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782205

Chapter ) – Eight Institutions (cid:0) 3
Wikipedia). This leads us to wonder whether decentralized organizations can ever sur-
vive economic success.
The answer is yes. The ) tools listed above give us new power in designing and
implementing decentralized organizations. They allow secure and efficient accounting
of voluminous transactions that happen in a decentralized network, so that money
can be shared appropriately in an organization without resorting to centralized dicta-
tors arbitrating the dispersal of funds. If, however, the goal of the organization is to
maintain decentralization (assuming that is preferable), then these tools must be used
wisely to prevent the natural concentration of power that occurs when inefficiencies
in the economy allow pockets of corruption to accumulate rent-seeking actors.
Finally, no decentralized organization devoted to profit can be successful in the
contemporary marketplace against centralized organizations until eight big problems
are solved, all at once.
A decentralized economy requires
Money. Coinage.
Bitcoin proved it was possible to create a decentralized digital representation of value.
Because this proof of concept technology doesn’t have the rest of a decentralized eco-
nomic environment to exist in, it is not efficient enough to use widely.
Processing/smart contracts.
The executive policing functions of our business and government should be auto-
mated to prevent corruption. Ethereum proved this was possible, to process secure
and valuable business contracts in a decentralized network. Like Bitcoin, it won’t be
efficient until it lives in a robust decentralized economy. It won’t last unless its gov-
ernance is fixed.
Still missing are W more essential facets of the economy that all need to work together.
Each one needs the others to exist in a working economy fit for the average consumer.
(Organized in roughly the chronological order of what needs to be built first.)
Reputation.
This is the proper goal, instead of money, for motivating good behavior in business
and governance. Properly accounting for reputation switches the incentives from
short-term zero-sum thinking to long-term positive-sum behavior. Without building a
secure and meaningful reputational system, none of the other aspects of the decen-
tralized economy will be effective.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782205

4 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Eight Institutions
Governance.
Decentralized power regulation has been a conscious goal since the FGth century. To-
day the technology has improved, so that it is possible to account for good and bad
behavior on a near infinitesimal scale and reward and punish fairly. A sophisticated
system of governance is required to effectively adjust to market changes and to main-
tain stability. Executive (automated policing), legislative (non-automated protocol de-
velopment), and judicial (both automated and non-automated dispute resolution)
governance must be considered.
Reputation and governance are the two most important institutions that are lack-
ing in the decentralized economy. They occupy the majority of our concern for the
remainder of the book. Once they are solved, the rest of the missing pieces are rela-
tively easy to supply. Including:
Finance.
Stablecoin: This is a currency that doesn’t fluctuate in price. The artificially scarce
bitcoin currency is deflationary as long as its market expands. Like gold, its fluctuation
makes it unsuitable for daily commerce. Without stability, typical consumers will
never hold their checking account in the currency. No one will make a long-term con-
tract for an essential service. Gambling with your contracts is inefficient, economically.
Renegotiating contracts whenever the currency changes is expensive, and continually
and randomly punishes at least one of the parties. We need a robust decentralized
economy (#W, below) before the stablecoin can be efficient—another chicken and egg
problem.
Decentralized Marketplaces: Neutral platforms for trades in properties and services
are needed for thriving business with various rules for participation.
Banking: provides a necessary service to absorb the risk of less secure but more effi-
cient small transactions. These are then bundled before a more expensive but secure
transaction happens with the central bank. In P]P, the redundant and eternal storage
of the blockchain takes the place of the central bank.
Underwriting: We need trust that the transactions in the marketplaces will go through,
or that otherwise the contract will be made whole by the platform running the mar-
ketplace. Underwriting is essential for every type of business transaction, every type
of property, every type of worker/service you hire. Every type of economic action is
made more efficient when decisions are hedged, so we can confidently change our
investments, keeping the market liquid. Lending and insurance are essential catalysts
for business, that require someone to underwrite the risk. Like policing, underwriting
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782205

Chapter ) – Eight Institutions (cid:0) 5
can be decentralized and automated, giving each member the power to control the
level of security they require.
Services
A diverse DAO ecosystem is crucial. Consumers require many services our current
economy provides, that all need to be decentralized, such as commerce and trade
jobs. The gig economy is rife with horror stories, but a fully decentralized structure
with proper governance could solve such problems.
History
A marketplace must be trustworthy, with momentum. How is attention focused, on
which details, with which narrative? What is the internet search engine for the decen-
tralized economy? How do you tell the story of what the data means? How trustwor-
thy is each DAO, compared with other DAOs? We need ratings for everything. Who
controls the information?
News services (oracles) and information repositories need to be decentralized.
Transcendental Values
DAOs derive unity from their ideals, their common goals and aspirations beyond the
protocols. This final requirement is the most important for long-term stability, and will
require eternal reevaluation. Decentralized institutions require strong unifying values
to remain coherent.
For the remainder of the book, we will explore these categories, which have
mostly been neglected by P]P engineers. The new tools of information technology can
make major efficiency improvements in these traditional institutions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782205

6 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Eight Institutions
Bibliography
Formating example:
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782205

