Chapter ) – Future Decentralization 1
Future of Decentralization
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
This Chapter examines the future of decentralization. While humans who were
raised in a centralized world by default turn to centralized solutions for societal prob-
lems, decentralized approaches are more effective for global problems. Decentralized
networks encourage interoperability through bureaucratic transparency. While the
decentralized developer community is moving remarkably fast, inevitable improve-
ments are still necessary. The chapter demonstrates that Bitcoin and Ethereum have
provided primitive decentralized versions of currency and business contracts. The real
task at hand is the construction of decentralized versions of all the rest of the institu-
tions that business and society rely on. The chapter provides a guide for navigating the
future decades of decentralization with a view towards the required experimentation
with and failure of decentralized structures that help filter out the centralized impuri-
ties of a flawed understanding of decentralization.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Chapter 6. Future Decentralization
The goal of decentralization is to give most individuals more power, improving the
entire group. But it does not remove all walls and regulations. With this new individual
power we will make more walls and more cryptographic security. But the new powers
of information technology gives us the power to make regulation more complex, more
dynamic and responsive. IT helps people to make doors, empowering us to move be-
tween spaces securely, anywhere on the planet.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

2 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
IT advances secure your spaces by walling off those who don’t want to make pos-
itive contributions, protecting material and ideal spaces from Tragedy of the Com-
mons degradation, free riders, and rent-seeking. Cloning successful open source DAO
governance structures will allow people to collaborate on any projects they wish,
opening other doors for those not interested or capable of contributing to the spaces
they are walled off from. Digital doors and walls can be much more powerful than
material walls and doors have ever been.
Vision of human-centered, AI-enabled Internet of Things
“It is remarkable how closely the history of the apple tree is connected with that
of man."
--Henry David Thoreau, “Wild Apples: The History of the Apple-Tree”
The Atlantic, November OPQR
The Internet of Things (IoT), organized by a decentralized platform with many col-
laborating DAOs, is an example of how decentralization can add significant efficiency
to the economy. IoT is the idea that in the future, all of our devices will communicate
through wireless internet technology and share information so they can work together
more efficiently. Since the OVQWs there have been futuristic designs for our refrigera-
tors to monitor our pantry and automatically send orders to the grocer for deliveries.
With cheap processors and WiFi, IoT promises to unite every device in our society.
This provokes privacy concerns and the question of who owns and controls the data.
To achieve the promise of IoT, several ingredients are required. A system of device
identification is needed, as well as a coherent system for communication between
many different devices with different broadcasting and memory capabilities. Neutral
business territory—a decentralized marketplace—is needed to contractually agree on
the protocols of automated collaboration between devices owned and controlled by
independent businesses. And the entire structure must be transparent, so that audits
of the system can be performed to maintain integrity as it continually evolves.
WebZ PRP technologies embody these properties of decentralization, autonomy,
efficiency, personal privacy, and bureaucratic transparency. WebZ is being built to de-
velop the smart contracting environment for providing precisely these solutions. But
an evolutionary structure that encourages continual systemic improvement for busi-
ness collaboration is needed.
Consider the market orbit of an apple, its supply chain: all the organizations and
resources involved in bringing the apple to a consumer. The apple’s entire history is
full of valuable market information, from before the origin of the seed of its tree, until
after its core has been composted. If each step along its history can be reliably rec-
orded and verified by a host of independent companies, we can regulate its quality,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 3
and objectively verify its value. This will improve efficiency and ensure satisfaction for
all parties involved—from producers, handlers, shippers, holders, vendors, and cus-
tomers, to all the ancillary parties which supply each of these parties with products or
services. In point of fact, the strong interconnectivity of contemporary markets means
the supply chain of an apple is ultimately linked with every actor in the entire econ-
omy—a violin lesson in Vietnam is three degrees of separation from an Austrian Ap-
felstrudel.
When the apple seeds are sold to the farmer, their provenance can be verified.
When the seeds are planted, the planting can be verified. When the tree is watered,
the sprinkler can verify the position, the weather, and the amount and quality of water
used. The consumer scans the tag on the apple, which verifies the exact moment the
apple was harvested, processed, shipped, delivered to the vendor, and placed on the
shelf. Then a program will analyze how the apple’s history indicates its quality and
nutrition according to a scientific algorithm. If its shipment was delayed at the ware-
house, it’s not as fresh as it could be and not as valuable. If the apple was handled
optimally at every step along the way, it’s worth more.
At this point the apple’s market orbit is only half finished. Who buys it, how long
it’s stored, where it’s stored, how it is used or wasted, whether it’s composted, what
procedures the composter uses, what products that compost fertilizes, what happens
to those products, are all part of the apple’s supply chain. If each step can be reliably
and economically recorded, each actor can be fairly rewarded, giving all parties the
confidence to do business while minimizing corruption and rent seeking. Big data gen-
erated by mobile telecommunication and all the devices in the Internet of Things al-
lows researchers to understand new correlations, which allows better decision making
and improves efficiency at every level. Contrary to the criticisms that have been
lobbed against blockchains as being designed to dodge regulation, the actual goal is
to ensure effective, efficient, adaptive regulation in a truly decentralized manner, ul-
timately exceeding the current level of oversight. (Their adherence to transparency
means their understandable disdain for slow and unresponsive centralized regulation
often leaks beyond their development circle.)
In order to create a sustainable infrastructure for IoT, we need an endlessly ex-
pandable platform that properly incentivizes productive collaboration. The endless ex-
pansion includes countless smart contracts that need to be continually developed,
maintained, policed, and improved, to intercommunicate at every step of the market
orbit of every material item in our lives. Smart contracts will provide immediate busi-
ness negotiation and resolution in dynamic AI-enabled interchanges. For this we need
a diverse list of DAOs for each of the business interests along the supply chain, with
the relevant background expertise. We need a system which incentivizes productive
collaboration between numerous independent DAOs and individual actors. The sys-
tem must negotiate fair valuations of each and every fine-grained contribution.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

4 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
PRP collaboration provides the neutral territory where independent companies
or organizations can do business. Smart contracts provide cheap and efficient auto-
mated regulatory mechanisms, linking the processes of the supply chain.
There are two major structures from our contemporary economy, however, that
are still missing in the WebZ environment.
First, we need an incentive mechanism for productive collaboration. Like the Ma-
ghribi traders, WebZ needs a secure and meaningful reputation system to maintain
their decentralized structure of collaboration in the face of the centralizing tendency
of competition for profits. Reputation enables the self-policing that is necessary to
maintain a DAO’s integrity.
Second, the decentralized economy needs effective governance structures. It
must adapt to rapid technological and organizational innovation in a network of di-
verse parties with diverse goals. The decentralized economy needs many different
DAOs with rigid governance protocols, to harmonize the diverse groups, yet allow
them to adjust to market changes. Like the architecture of OVth century democracies,
these DAOs need a dynamic system to maintain their integrity and protect individual
autonomy.
It is conceivable that the IoT infrastructure will be governed by ever evolving
DAOs. A DAO that has mastered decentralization internally can thus help IoT infra-
structure products utilize such decentralized governance structures for their own gov-
ernance and interoperability. We believe that effective decentralized DAO governance
necessitates reputation verification systems. DAOs that are internally well-governed
by a reputation verification engine allow other IoT infrastructure entities to simply
clone the DAO governance for their own purposes and run a DAO with the same gov-
ernance metrics. As we will explain further below, this system of transplanting gov-
ernance has several beneficial aspects.
Each process in the supply chain must self-police in separate DAOs. For example,
orchard farmers will be part of a DAO which verifies their particular reputation for
growing apples. They will choose protocols for watering their orchard when the con-
ditions require it, and will record that they have performed the task with GPS devices
attached to their sprinklers. The orchard farmers themselves have the best knowledge
for protecting the value of their own reputation. If some of their members are not
following protocol—if someone attempts to game the system and provide inferior
products by cutting corners—the farmers themselves are best able to anticipate and
respond to the attack, developing the most efficient protocols to police bad-faith ac-
tors and support those with good faith. The power of decentralization is individual
autonomy. Self-policing their own members is more effective when the members have
the power, unlike a centralized hierarchy which is more prone to structural corruption
when each member holds distinct powers and responsibilities. Each DAO is motivated
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 5
to continually improve their own processes and protect their own reputation, in order
to attract business from the other systems in the supply chain.
The GPS-enabled sprinkler-monitoring device will be installed by members of a
separate DAO whose expertise is to police their own industry. They will cooperate with
the orchard farmer DAO in order to attract their business, so the orchard farmer DAO
will rely on the device DAO’s reputation and smart contracts to police the farmers’
growing operations. Working together, each of the DAOs’ reputations become more
valuable in the larger economy when they help each other provide a superior product.
This dynamic IoT object-automated economy will be integrated with the human-
experienced economy. Each persons’ contributions can be fairly valuated for their pre-
sent and future value to the decentralized economy with smart contract protocols.
Rights within and between numerous DAOs can be parsed and negotiated, automati-
cally and immediately, according to the protocols of each DAO. Contributions that pre-
viously were ignored as too insignificant to be efficiently accounted for, can now be
fairly evaluated, thanks to improved processing and transmission power. This will en-
courage greater participation and a culture of meritocracy that will incentivize authen-
tic collaboration.
For the whole supply chain to work in harmony, numerous DAOs must cooperate.
Countless protocols will vary amongst and between the various expertises. On-de-
mand products and services will be automatically negotiated and engaged through
dynamic programming. Unanticipated legal contracts will regularly be invented
through micro-second AI calculations to optimize business outcomes in a dynamic en-
vironment which moves too quickly to wait for human corroboration.
The system which hosts such a complex network of DAOs with such a variety of
business behaviors must be general enough to adapt to the endless protocol innova-
tions required, but expressive enough to rigorously capture the specific protocols
needed for each individual expertise. The core structure must be designed to generate
any type of DAO and provide the choices needed to make effective governance struc-
tures. In Chapter b, we detail the necessities for secure and effective decentralized
governance. Before that, in Chapter Q, we detail the construction of secure and mean-
ingful decentralized reputation, which gives the proper incentive mechanism for glu-
ing the whole decentralized collaboration together.
The Internet of Things is a complicated structure to wrap our heads around. But
more complicated systems are already guiding our daily decisions. Before we discuss
the details of DAO governance, we should delve deeper into our understanding of the
technology we rely on today.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

6 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
Algorithmically automated control
Automation is responsible for the majority of material advances humanity has en-
joyed since World War II. Since before Watts’ steam engine, ideas from control theory
have been making humanity ever more materially powerful.1 Improvements in com-
puter processors have made increasingly sophisticated algorithms for automating sys-
tems that are controlling more functions in every aspect of our lives. The list of in-
structions that automated machines can now be given is seemingly unlimited, since
an algorithm can now be as long as the memory the computer controller can hold—
and with Wi-Fi controllers, that expands to include the entire internet.2 Artificial in-
telligence—especially in the form of neural networks and evolutionary program-
ming—is making another technological leap past the most complicated human-de-
signed algorithms.
Algorithmic automation optimizes human outputs, performance, and interac-
tions, elevating every material function in society. At the same time, the conveniences
and benefits bring with them risks to humanity that cannot be fully quantified. As we
use new technologies we come to rely on them, until we can no longer survive without
them. This has been true since humanswe first invented spears and shoes. Our socie-
ties grew to a size that could not be supported without the technology. Without the
Haber process, a technology that creates fertilizer from the air, the Earth would not
be able to support its b billion people.
Algorithmic automation is affecting society at a large scale. Since the early RWOWs,
algorithmic functionalities and algorithms that utilize big data from sensors, IoT de-
vices, GIS systems3, and other big datasets, have begun dominating social and busi-
ness decisions. As internet-based applications are becoming increasingly prevalent
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 For example, Christiaan Huygens invented flyball governors in the ?@AAs. Huygens’ governors were
used to regulate the speed of windmills by automatically adjusting the angle of its vanes when the
flyball spun quicker. The physicist Maxwell did careful research explaining their function, which was
used on ?JKK by Watt in his steam engine.
Enrique Fernández Cara & Enrique Zuazua Iriondo, “Control theory: history, mathematical achieve-
ments and perspectives”, Boletín de la Sociedad Española de Matemática Aplicada, [@, pp J\-?]A
([AA)).
2 According to the IDC the internet held more than ?K zettabytes in [A?K. That’s more than
?K,AAA,AAA,AAA,AAA,AAA,AAA,AAA bytes of data—a number too big to be intuitively comprehended
by humans. https://www.seagate.com/files/www-content/our-story/trends/files/idc-seagate-
dataage-whitepaper.pdf (Retrieved K/@/[A).
3 GIS stands for Geographic Information System is a framework for integrating numerous types of
global geographic data. There are layers that map the location, quantity and type of minerals in the
ground; a layer describing the location and quality of groundwater; a layer describing every detail of
civil engineering projects, such as streets, buildings, sewage, and electricity; a layer describing social
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 7
and used by humans, such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon, such applications not
only provide conveniences in humans’ daily lives, but the algorithms themselves are
accumulating more power due to their usefulness in society. We are becoming con-
scious of the fact that we spend a lot of our time devoted to doing tasks that serve the
computers, instead of the computers serving us. As a single example, the Google
search engine already dictates many mundane decisions we make in our daily lives,
such as what to buy and where to buy it; it settles arguments and tells us what is true
and important by guiding us to authoritative information. Algorithmic automation
guides societal outcomes and therefore it benefits some groups over others—whether
or not its owners and developers intentionally manipulate these outcomes. Central-
ized ownership and control of algorithmic automation is an important issue for soci-
ety. Decentralized systems can counteract the downsides and threats of algorithmic
automation, thereby enhancing the long-term benefits of technological solutions for
humanity.
Algorithmic functions can transcend bounded human rationality. Human actions
and outcomes are increasingly optimized through the use of big data and its analysis.
The quantification of human thought, feeling, and action and their algorithmic optimi-
zation can improve social behaviors in ways that are too complex for humans to un-
derstand without the data-driven algorithmic aids. For example, the increasing avail-
ability of health data and analytics improves human health-related choices, especially
if reinforced with algorithmic applications that interact with humans. Health data
through sensors, wearables, and internet monitoring gives us recommendations on
how to improve our lives and treat and prevent disease.
Given the analytical and predictive skills of algorithmic applications, data and al-
gorithmic oracles can improve individual behavior, experiences, and achievement. But
they can also improve the achievement of large networks of people, even larger soci-
ety. For example, algorithmic applications can incrementally upgrade democratic pro-
cesses in society. Big data and algorithmic data analytics today enable centralized al-
gorithmically automated systems (such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon in the early
RWRWs) to discover individuals’ political preferences better than the individuals can
themselves.4 Algorithmic data analytics-driven human choice transcends humans’
(cid:0)(cid:0)
patterns, such as traffic, crime, and monetary flow. Algorithms built for analyzing this public data can
be used to make more accurate valuations of property, so that McDonald’s knows whether a location
will give a successful franchise before they invest.
Neal Ungerleider, “How Fast Food Chains Pick Their Next Location”, Fast Company (K/[i/[A?]) Avail-
able online at https://www.fastcompany.com/)A)]J\[/how-fast-food-chains-pick-their-next-loca-
tion (Retrieved K/@/[A).
4 Kahneman, Daniel, Fredrickson, Barbara L., Schreiber, Charles A., & Redelmeier, Donald A. (Nov.
?\\)). When More Pain is Preferred to Less: Adding a Better End. Psychological Science, 0:@, ]A?-]Ai.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

8 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
bounded rationality.5 As algorithmic analytics and predictions of human preferences
and choice become increasingly accepted, exercising human political will by proxy
through algorithmic interpretations may become increasingly common.
Taken to the extreme, centralized control of algorithmic automation could negate
human input in data systems if the systems are designed to ignore individual choice,
in preference to the goals of the platforms’ owners. Humans’ bounded rationality cre-
ates inefficiencies that can be improved upon. Human consciousness is more limited
on many matters than networked computer systems.
However, decentralized systems can preserve human power and control, while
providing superior outcomes by objective standards. Decentralized systems can out-
compete centralized systems. Centralized algorithmic automation uses centrally col-
lected data to enhance decision-making and outcomes with opaque algorithms to fur-
ther the goals of the few owners. Decentralized systems are guided by the wisdom of
the crowd, from humans and machines. Where centralized algorithmic automation
would systematically remove the human presence in an effort to optimize efficiency
and outcomes, decentralized systems use the power of algorithmic applications to en-
hance its features and outcomes with an omnipresent human backstop. Where cen-
tralized algorithmic automation would create an autocracy powered by centralized
algorithmic human predictors, decentralized systems would create a meritocracy
powered by optimized human decisions that increase diversity of choice for all.6 De-
centralized organizations give their members more power and autonomy. A decen-
trally controlled and owned algorithmically automated control system puts ultimate
choices (such as design) back in the hands of people.
How can complicated algorithmic systems that are beyond individual human com-
prehension be built with foundational human backstops? How can we build systems
that profitably exploit the wisdom of the crowd? Decentralization is the key. For ex-
ample, in the early RWRWs, cryptocurrency startups have started to experiment with
more sophisticated upgrades to democratic systems. Complex voting schemes are be-
ing explored with a focus on incentive designs. These evolving technologies with hu-
man voting inputs can, over time, become automated to regulate the most minute
decisions with decentralized consensus. The voting structure can be abstracted to
scale decentralized power: mundane choices like “which self-driving car gets to pass”
(cid:0)(cid:0)
5 Ibid. Kahneman’s cold water experiments suggest that humans listen to a narrating self in political
decision making, follow a peak-end rule, forget the vast majority of political events during a given
legislation period, focus exclusively on a few extreme outlier events, and give largely disproportionate
weight in political decision making to the most recent events. Ibid.
6 As Karl Popper put it: “The growth of knowledge depends entirely on disagreement”, Popper, Karl R.
(?\\]). The Myth of the Framework: In Defence of Science and Rationality. Routledge: London.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 9
can be automated, while sophisticated choices such as “which social programs de-
serve more funding” or “how to design the automated voting systems” can be con-
sciously and manually controlled by humans. We will explore how these systems are
being designed in Chapter b and the consequences of such a microdemocracy.
Decentralized Commerce
Decentralized technology solutions create disruptions for existing legacy com-
merce. The emergence and proliferation of distributed blockchain applications
(DApps) in the aftermath of the invention of the Bitcoin protocol in RWWV demonstrate
that a nascent market for such applications and consumer demand already exists at
the beginning of the RWRWs. Consumer preferences continue to shape the DApps mar-
ket and the solutions it may offer for commerce and society. Significant markets for
blockchain applications will be the corporate marketplace, banks, legal, realty, and
insurance. These markets will all be impacted significantly. DApps create solutions for
business and society that are subject to far fewer and rather different transaction
costs compared with centralized legacy businesses in the same industries. Through
code-based solutions, DApps can help increase the overall trust of consumers and
market participants at an unprecedented scale. Despite many cybersecurity issues as-
sociated with cryptocurrencies, among others, code-based trust can help lower trans-
action costs, but it also increases consumer and overall market confidence and cer-
tainty, which facilitate economies of scale that are only occasionally and temporarily
possible in centralized structures. Through the lower cost structure, decentralized
platforms have the ability to remove consumer fees that are an integral part of their
centralized competitor businesses. Removing such centralized fees also allows for the
removal of downward pressure on the platforms’ worker compensation as costs are
less likely to increase and be passed on to workers and consumers. The lack of fees
can help create a more efficient marketplace through the removal of the rent-seeking
intermediators.
Decentralized technologies’ ability to lower transaction costs by removing other-
wise needed intermediaries disrupts existing business models. For example, in the
early RWRWs blockchain technology provided numerous examples of evolving decen-
tralized technologies that create an independent and transparent platform for estab-
lishing truth and building trust. Intermediaries, bureaucracy, and old-fashioned proce-
dures are replaced by code, connectivity, crowds, and collaboration. An example here
is the decentralized finance (deFi) market, where financial products are increasingly
offered on top of digital assets to facilitate disintermediation of legacy systems such
as underwriting, banking, and trading—the middlemen are removed. The technology
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

10 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
increases transparency, openness, and speed, while at the same time significantly re-
ducing costs by automating the functions of traditional intermediaries.
The many applications of evolving blockchain technology have the potential to
change business models. Because of its implicit code-based guarantees, the technol-
ogy allows a qualitatively different solution for agency, a foundational element of cap-
italism. Blockchain technology can replace agency constructs for many business rela-
tionships. The guarantees ensure that participants cannot circumvent the rules
embedded in the code, contracts execute only if and when all contract parameters are
fulfilled by both parties and verified by a majority of miners/nodes in the system.
Blockchain-based guarantees remove agency costs because principals are less essen-
tial for monitoring agents, which addresses the inherent agency problems in modern
finance and corporate governance.
Similarly, decentralized technologies reform business, administrative, and legal
processes that rely on intermediaries. Any such processes may be updated and im-
proved with decentralized technologies. For example, corporate processes that have
ledger functionality but rely on legal intermediaries could be streamlined very quickly
by implementing blockchain technology. When blockchain technology becomes more
widely accepted and applications further spread into consumer-facing markets, legacy
business processes and structures will likely be among the first to be amended. The
combination of blockchain technology startups with platforms and machine learning
present enormous opportunities to improve business and society. These technologies
used in combination with big data and machine learning are becoming increasingly
profitable and efficient. These tools, in turn, creates a surge of new and innovative
platforms with disruptive effects for many industries.
Decentralized payment systems’ ability to rely entirely on cryptocurrencies cre-
ates comparative advantages over centralized systems. Centralized legacy fiat pay-
ment systems and platforms typically require some form of an existing banking rela-
tionship in order for consumers to utilize their services. Holding and storing
cryptocurrencies does not require a banking relationship. While many legacy banks
are cognizant of their limitations and are ready to embrace cryptocurrencies, central-
ized legacy fiat payment systems remain subject to payment processing issues and
slow processing times for payments. Intermediaries such as banks and PayPal also re-
quire high fees. The fees make it only economically viable for higher volumes of trans-
actions, creating barriers to entry in the process. Decentralized payment systems are
not subject to these limitations, as anyone connected with the internet can create a
free digital wallet and participate on decentralized platforms. Finally, while money
laundering has traditionally been a problem in these markets, anonymity of market
participants in cryptocurrency networks can also increase participation in certain mar-
kets and economies. As the technology and its uses evolve, traditional markets are
increasingly encapsulated by it.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 11
Legacy payment systems, cash, and bank notes are gradually losing ground to
other payment systems.7 At the beginning of the RWRWs, in Northern Europe, as few
as one in every five transactions is made in cash.8 Cash usage in the United States, the
United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, Finland, Canada, France, among other in-
dustrialized nations, has fallen well below oW% of total transaction volume.9 In the
United States, transacting in cash costs the consumer around RWW billion dollars annu-
ally—about rQZb per person annually, which is a result of the cost of production, stor-
age, and transportation, among other factors.10
The end of technological life cycles of legacy systems in the early RWRWs and asso-
ciated emerging trends in payment systems necessitate central banks’ enhanced ex-
amination of alternative payment systems.11 Central banks and governments around
(cid:0)(cid:0)
7 Rogoff, Kenneth S. ([A?@). The Curse of Cash. Princeton: Princeton University Press: Princeton;
Brugge, Jonathan, Denecker, Olivier, Jawaid, Hamza, Kovacs, Andras, & Shami, Ibrahim (Aug. [A, [A?K).
Attacking the Cost of Cash. McKinsey & Company: Our Insights, https://www.mckinsey.com/indus-
tries/financial-services/our-insights/attacking-the-cost-of-cash (accessed June ?, [A[A).
8 Ibid.
9 Ibid.
10 Ibid. The cost of cash is primarily associated with counting, managing, storing, transporting, guard-
ing, and accounting for bank notes. Berensten, Aleksander & Schar, Fabian ([A?K). The Case for Central
Bank Electronic Money and the Non-case for Central Bank Cryptocurrencies. Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis Review, ?AA:[, \J-?A@; The theft of cash alone costs U.S. retail businesses losses around m]A
billion annually. Yakowicz, Will (Sept. [A, [A?)). Cash Costs U.S. Businesses m]A Billion a Year. Inc.,
https://www.inc.com/will-yakowicz/dealing-with-cash-costs-american-businesses-ii-billion.html (ac-
cessed June ?, [A[A).
11 Bech, Morten & Garratt, Rodney ([A?J). Central Bank Cryptocurrencies. BIS Quarterly Review.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

12 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
the world have been experimenting with government-sponsored digital and crypto-
currencies since RWOo.12 In the case of central banks, such experimentation was al-
ready close to launch13 or fully operational in the early RWRWs.14 Most major tech
companies in the private sector have been experimenting with cryptocurrency pro-
(cid:0)(cid:0)
12 Hileman, Garrick & Rauchs, Michel ([A?J). Global Cryptocurrency Benchmarking Study. Cambridge
Cenre for Alternative Finance, https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/research/cen-
tres/alternative-finance/downloads/[A?J-A]-[A-global-cryptocurrency-benchmarking-study.pdf (ac-
cessed June ?, [A[A); Mersch, Yves (July [], [A?J). Central Bank Speech at the Cent. Bank of Malaysia
Monetary Policy Conference [transcript available at https://www.bis.org/review/r?JAKAJc.htm]; Digi-
tal Currency Initiative, MIT Media Lab, https://dci.mit.edu; Monetary Authority of Singapore, Financial
Stability Review (Nov. [A?J), https://www.mas.gov.sg/-/media/MAS/resource/publications/fsr/FSR-
[A?J.pdf; Meaning, Jack, Dyson, Ben, Barker, James & Clayton, Emily (May [A?K). Broadening Narrow
Money: Monetary Policy with a Central Bank Digital Currency. Bank of England [Staff Working Paper
No. J[]]; Koning, J.P. ([A?@). Fedcoin: A Central Bank-Issued Cryptocurrency, R) Report, ?i; Motamedi,
Sina (July [?, [A?]). Will Bitcoins Ever Become Money? A Path to Decentralized Central Banking, Tan-
nuTuva.org, https://tannutuva.org/[A?]/will-bitcoins-ever-become-money-a-path-to-decentralized-
central-banking.
13 The Bank of Canada and Bank of England announced in [A?@ that the technology was not ready for
a central bank-sponsored cryptocurrency. Yet other central banks, such as in Singapore and Sweden,
have already launched their e-currency projects.
14 Chohan, Usman W. (Feb. J, [A?K). Cryptocurrencies as Asset-Backed Instruments: The Venezuelan
Petro [unpublished paper], https://papers.ssrn.com/sol)/papers.cfm?abstract_id=)??\@A@; Zagaris,
Bruce ([A?K). U.S. Bans Venezuela's New Cryptocurrency and Adds ) Officials to Sanctions List. Inter-
national Enforcement Law Reporter, N0:), ?iJ-?@?; Hirschfeld Davis, Julie & Popper, Nathaniel (Mar.
[A, [A?K). White House Bans Venezuela's Digital Currency and Imposes Further Sanctions. New York
Times, A?.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 13
jects since RWOb. Several governments have issued their own digital currencies. Exam-
ples include Tunisia (eDinar),15 Senegal (eCFA),16 Sweden (eKrona),17 Dubai (Em-
Cash),18 Japan (Jcoin),19 Estonia (Estcoin),20 and Ecuador,21 among others.22
Reputation systems and Orwellian nightmares
In order to build politically decentralized networks devoted to profit, we argue
that it is necessary to follow the Maghribis’ example. In order to keep a decentralized
organization aligned in the pursuit of their goals, you must provide something more
valuable than money: reputation. With our new information technology we can build
global networks of billions of people united with a single set of protocols. We can track
their reputation with digitally accurate computer processing and storage.
Fiction has already furnished many cautionary tales about developing a reputa-
tional system to monitor citizens in a society. The fear is in our collective unconscious,
as demonstrated by the many recent novels, television shows, and movies devoted to
(cid:0)(cid:0)
15 Kastelein, Richard (Dec. [K, [A?i). Tunisia to Replace Its National Digital Currency, eDinar, with
Blockchain-Driven Monetas Currency. Blockchain News, https://www.the-block-
chain.com/[A?i/?[/[K/tunisia-to-replace-its-national-digital-currency-edinar-with-blockchain-driven-
monetas-currency/ (accessed June ?, [A[A).
16 Das, Samburaj (Nov. [K, [A?@). Senegal Will Introduce a Blockchain-Based National Digital Cur-
rency. CCN, https://www.ccn.com/senegal-will-introduce-blockchain-based-national-digital-cur-
rency/.
17 Afraid of a few commercial entities controlling cash supply in Sweden, the Swedish central bank
has kicked off its digital currency project e-krona. Billner, Amanda (Oct. [@, [A?K). Now There are
Plans for 'e-Krona' in Cash-Shy Sweden. Bloomberg: Economics, https://www.bloom-
berg.com/news/articles/[A?K-?A-[@/riksbank-to-develop-pilot-electronic-currency-amid-cash-de-
cline.
18 Buck, Jon (Oct. ?, [A?J). Dubai Will Issue First Ever State Cryptocurrency. Cointelegraph,
https://cointelegraph.com/news/dubai-will-issue-first-ever-state-cryptocurrency.
19 Kharpal, Arjun (Sep. [J, [A?J). Japanese Banks are Thinking of Making Their Own Cryptocurrency
Called the J-Coin. CNBC: Tech Transformers, https://www.cnbc.com/[A?J/A\/[J/japanese-banks-
cryptocurrency-j-coin.html.
20 Korjus, Kaspar (Dec. ?K, [A?J). We're Planning to Launch estcoin - and That's Only the Start. Me-
dium, https://medium.com/e-residency-blog/were-planning-to-launch-estcoin-and-that-s-only-the-
start-)?AabaJf)J\A.
21 Rosenfeld, Everett (Feb. \, [A?i). Exuador Becomes the First Country to Roll Out Its Own Digital
Cash. CNBC.com, https://www.cnbc.com/[A?i/A[/A@/ecuador-becomes-the-first-country-to-roll-
out-its-own-digital-durrency.html.
22 Thomson Reuters (Oct. [i, [A?J). Cryptocurrencies by Country, https://blogs.thomsonreu-
ters.com/answerson/world-cryptocurrencies-country/.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

14 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
portraying dystopias of injustice generated by poorly-designed automated reputation
systems.23
But the tools of information technology are too powerful to deny. Back in RWOZ,
publisher Tim O’Reilly (who was instrumental a decade earlier in promoting the term
Web R.W) explained its inevitability.24 Using the example of the Uber ride-sharing app,
he argued how decentralized feedback loops are more efficient for self-policing and
regulating social behavior than top-down hierarchical governance. The scandals that
have pestered Uber in the intervening decade have almost always derived from cen-
tralized decision making.
Centralized reputational systems are already functioning and guiding peoples’ be-
havior. eBay has had a feedback reputational system for customers and vendors since
its inception in OVVo, with an updated Seller Rating system in RWWP. Insurance compa-
nies are employing apps to monitor and reward or punish customers based on their
behavior. Most major automobile insurance companies have smartphone apps to
monitor their customers’ driving habits. Most major health insurance companies have
apps to monitor their customers’ exercise and dietary habits, tracking their move-
ments and purchases. Currently these are opt-in, given traditional Western attitudes
on privacy, but it is easily foreseeable that the information could be valuable enough
to make it too punishing for members to opt-out, de facto mandatory.
Temporary gig workers in the platform economy are subject to reputational sys-
tems, such as TaskRabbit and Upwork. All major centralized social media platforms
have opaque reputational systems for monitoring their users. Since RWOP, to combat
the spread of fake news on their platform, “Facebook has begun to assign its users a
reputation score, predicting their trustworthiness on a scale from zero to O.”25
Throughout civilized history governments have instituted surveillance programs, judg-
ing their citizens for trustworthiness. Singapore, Estonia, and Israel have especially so-
phisticated contemporary programs.
The most ambitious and pervasive reputational system for controlling peoples’
behavior is easily the Chinese Communist Party’s Social Credit System (SCS). The Social
(cid:0)(cid:0)
23 Cf., MeowMeowBeenz from the television show Community, Seasoni, Episode K “App Development
and Condiments”, March @, [A?]. Black Mirror, Season ) “Nosedive”. The Orville, Season ?, Episode J
“Majority Rule”. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/App_Development_and_Condiments (Retrieved
K/K/[A)
24 Tim O’Reilly, “Open data and algorithmic regulation”, pp [K\–)AA, in B. Goldstein (ed), Beyond
Transparency, Code for America Press, San Francisco ([A?)).
25 Elizabeth Dwoskin, “Facebook is rating the trustworthiness of its users on a scale from zero to ?”,
Washington Post, August [?, [A?K.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 15
Credit System26 gathers information on minute behaviors, such as jaywalking, litter-
ing, and helping your neighbors. The SCS then uses computer algorithms, including
artificial intelligence, to analyze the data and give you a Social Credit Score. This score
is then used to determine whether or not you are eligible for a particular job, whether
your children can attend better schools, even whether you can travel to other prov-
inces.
The Social Credit System evokes reflexive fear in the average Westerner, but it is
received much more positively in mainland China. The mainlanders27 have a very dif-
ferent culture than Western societies, due to a very different experience from their
recent history. “The result of decades of control…is that Chinese society suffers from
a lack of trust, says veteran sociologist Zhang Lifan. People often expect to be cheated
or to get in trouble without having done anything. This anxiety, Zhang says, stems from
the Cultural Revolution (OVQQ-OVbQ), when friends and family members were pitted
against one another and millions of Chinese were killed in political struggles. ‘It’s a
problem the ruling party itself has created,’ Zhang says, ‘and now it wants to solve it.’
The stated purpose of the social credit system is to help Chinese people trust each
other again.”28
The fact that people were starving in the streets in the OVQWs, the fact that most
people have family members in living memory who starved to death, means the entire
society past a certain age were severely traumatized. Everyone else was raised by peo-
ple who were traumatized. Many social ills derive from this experience.
Mainland Chinese often mistrust the people in their own society. They have a dim
view of human nature. So, they follow Han Fei’s Hobbesian philosophy of Legalism and
rigid centralization. They don’t believe in democracy—people should not be trusted
to rule. The West’s attitude is not currently quite as cynical. More often Westerners
believe people are good at heart, despite all the evidence to the contrary, since every
(cid:0)(cid:0)
26 The article https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_Credit_System (Retrieved K/K/[A) uses ?iA refer-
ences attempting to explain the extremely complicated system. Any paragraph-sized distillation
misses important aspects. For instance, there are many different Social Credit Systems in different
regions in China as they experiment with what systems will be most effective.
27 It is easy to argue Chinese people have a greater diversity of attitudes than Europeans. The Chinese
who live in Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Mongolia, Xinjiang, Tibet, and elsewhere, in every country
around the world, obviously have extremely diverse history and experiences. Within mainland China
the perspectives vary widely. A Chinese attitude toward any subject is impossible to pin down, yet we
persist in speaking as if the Chinese are a monolith. Simplifying and generalizing in this way is neces-
sary, however, in order to say anything about cultural and historical trends.
28 Simina Mistreanu, “Life Inside China’s Social Credit Laboratory”, Foreign Policy, April ), [A?K. Avail-
able online https://docs.house.gov/meetings/FA/FA?K/[A?KAJ??/?AKi)?/HHRG-??i-FA?K-[A?KAJ??-
SDAA?.pdf (Retrieved @/?K/[A)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

16 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
human society appears to be founded on traditions and laws reflecting historical vio-
lence.
Second, the Chinese have had a tradition of formal social policing on a much more
pervasive scale than the West. Baojia is a formal system of communal self-policing that
had been in place continually for the last OWWW years with only occasional interruptions
during major revolutions.29 Roughly, a Bao is a basic watch group consisting of OW
families who rotate their policing duties. A jia is a collection of OW Bao, or OWW families
whose representatives meet to report and unify their standards. Since the last major
revolution in OVxV policing became much more personally invasive as speech and
thought were carefully controlled by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), e.g., with
danwei, hukou, Golden Shield, and modern grid policing.
Third, mainland Chinese naturally feel like other countries in capitalistic systems
are adversaries; they feel that other countries are trying to exploit them (cf., the Cen-
tury of Humiliation); that they are still in an economic crisis and need a system which
can efficiently and rapidly respond. So, they naturally choose a centralized solution to
outcompete their enemies.
For all these reasons and others, the existence, nature, and current popularity of
the SCS system should not be particularly surprising, though its obvious Orwellian
overtones provoke an automatic negative reaction in the West.
There are many good reasons to implement the SCS. (But its likely use to oppress
minorities, such as Uighurs and Tibetans, makes it uncomfortable to discuss any posi-
tive aspects.) It is a powerful tool that is being used to improve many social conditions,
especially corruption, on a personal level, at the corporate level, and in public institu-
tions.30 The SCS uses the new tools of information technology in a formal manner
with respect to their government. That can be incredibly powerful and valuable to
improving society.
A similar type of social monitoring was implemented in RWRW in response to the
Covid-OV pandemic. The Alipay Health Code is an app created by the local Hangzhou
government with the help of Ant Financial, a sister company of the e-commerce giant
Alibaba. People in China sign up through Alipay. On any given day the app assigns its
users a color green, yellow or red to judge their health. Then users display their color
to guards before they are allowed into markets or on subways. Ant says the system is
(cid:0)(cid:0)
29 Sui-wai Cheung, "Baojia System", in Encyclopedia of Modern China, Gale Cengage Learning, pp ?)@-
?)J ([AA\)
30 Official purposes are described in the document “State Council Guiding Opinions concerning Estab-
lishing and Perfecting Incentives for Promise-keeping and Joint Punishment Systems for Trust-Break-
ing, and Accelerating the Construction of Social Sincerity”, GF No. ))m State Council, May )A, [A?@,
posted on China Copyright and Media, October ?K, [A?@, available at https://chinacopyrightandme-
dia.wordpress.com/ (Retrieved @/?K/[A)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 17
already in use in RWW cities and is being rolled out nationwide. 31 The opaque algo-
rithm monitors its users’ locations and assigns a score based on how close the users
were in contact with known outbreaks of the virus. The New York Times studied the
algorithm and “found that as soon as a user grants the software access to personal
data, a piece of the program labeled ‘reportInfoAndLocationToPolice’ sends the per-
son’s location, city name and an identifying code number to a server.”32
Many in the West are afraid the success of the SCS in furthering social harmony,
efficiency, and productivity will force other countries to adopt a version, to remain
competitive. However, the West doesn’t have the same fundamental factors motivat-
ing its implementation. If they do implement such a system, in a centralized form, it
will be from fear of social unrest or due to an abdication of individual responsibility.
Just as the Snowden leaks in RWOZ33 revealed the U.S. governments abuses of its citi-
zens privacy has led to no meaningful reform, centralized authorities have a long rec-
ord of using crises to justify the introduction of monitoring tools that outlast their
original purpose. The Covid-OV pandemic led to centralized nationwide monitoring of
citizens with contact tracing apps in many countries, and the expansion to reputa-
tional systems would be a simple modification.
But implementing any centralized nationwide reputational system would be a ma-
jor mistake, since a decentralized system would be far superior in most every way.
Centralized and opaque systems like the SCS are unstable in the long run. They
are particularly dangerous, because their computerized bureaucracy makes them in-
herently rigid. Their early successes will make them more and more brittle. The SCS
will certainly be successful in the beginning, and it will justify the strengthening of the
centralized government of the PRC. However, within a few years it will lose its rele-
vance and efficiency, because society will change faster than the centralized governing
bureaucracy can adapt—its effectiveness will not help, since that will only accelerate
the social change. Suggestions that AI will solve these problems are misguided, and
will fail for the same reason. Neural networks are merely a complex mathematical ar-
chitecture for performing statistical regression, which is always extremely unreliable
when applied to novel situations. Successful new business arrangements lead to suc-
cessful new business arrangements. There will always be new social situations to mon-
itor. Any success achieved by automating the SCS will only make it more brittle, and
more dangerous.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
31 Paul Mozur, Raymond Zhong, & Aaron Krolik, “In Coronavirus Fight, China Gives Citizens a Color
Code, With Red Flags”, New York Times, March ?, [A[A. Available online at https://www.ny-
times.com/[A[A/A)/A?/business/china-coronavirus-surveillance.html (Retrieved K/K/[A).
32 Ibid.
33 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_surveillance_disclosures (Retrieved K.K/[A)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

18 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
Until the Chinese people trust each other, they will not choose transparency and
decentralization of power. Assuming the CCP continues to use the SCS for propaganda,
showing violations on the nightly news, they can maintain the Hobbesian view of the
world, and prop up the SCS and the opaque power centralization of the CCP, no matter
how poorly it eventually functions, until the only solution is violent revolution.
The SCS is the complete opposite of the reputation system we suggest. Without
being able to look at the actual design of the CCP Social Credit System, we infer it has
the following design properties:
Synthesizes all types of reputation into one type of token. The reputation token
tells you whether you are a good or a bad citizen.
Completely closed membership. You cannot opt in or out.
No privacy. You are not anonymous in the system. You have O account with strict
identity control. You have no power over your own information.
Centralized with opaque governance. Complete lack of transparency in the oper-
ation and protocol updates.
The WebZ reputation systems that will be detailed in Chapter Q make precisely
the opposite design choices:
Many types of reputation tokens. O for each type of DAO. DAOs should be split
into many different types with many different DAOs for each type of expertise.
Open membership with anonymous accounts gives you complete freedom to join
or leave.
Privacy enabled by public key cryptography. Digital signature technology and
other ZK proofs allow you to use your information without revealing it.
Decentralized governance. Total transparency in operation and protocol updates.
An open source design is necessary to run any program in a PRP environment, because
decentralization means the source code needs to be shared by all if it isn’t controlled
centrally.
As Karl Popper argued in OVxo, an open society can outcompete closed socie-
ties.34
“It was Popper's great insight that where knowledge is subjected to competitive
evaluation and peer review by autonomous communities of scholars, theories that
genuinely advance human progress can be tested and improved. The unseen ad-
vantage of open societies over authoritarian ones lies here, in their capacity to inno-
vate, to unleash creative minds, and to turn their knowledge into insights, products,
techniques, and systems that reduce human suffering and improve our life together.
[…] Single party states have made a very different bet: they are gambling that they can
reconcile innovation and progress with political control and single party domination.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
34 Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, Vol. I: The Spell of Plato, London: Routledge (?\]i)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 19
The key unanswered question about how the twenty-first century turns out is which
kind […] of institutional form—open societies or single party states—will turn out to
be the more successful, which society will best fulfill the needs and aspirations of their
people.”35
The old vs. the new
Engineers are rapidly building the tools to decentralize our economic institutions.
There are many well-funded proposals for dispute resolution for smart contracts that
bypass our centralized justice system. Our traditional institutions are failing to re-
spond to these alternatives. The correct response in a democracy is not to fight against
progress, but to adopt these new tools—to decentralize power and make bureaucratic
information more transparent.
But these institutions are old. Their original legal constitutions were drafted with
goose feather pens on sheepskin parchment, bound together and stored in a single
library, placed at the center of town. The technology of the time did not permit a con-
ception of information processing that gives these new tools for decentralized govern-
ance and transparency.
The amount of democracy and transparency the founders of our current system
did achieve has been subverted in the intervening decades by the natural concentra-
tion of power that evolves under competition. The hierarchies have ossified. They are
likely too brittle now, to adopt processes that come from such radically different in-
formation technologies. Changes are likely to be seen as a threat to power and re-
sisted. If that is the case, engineers will continue to build systems which sidestep them
as irrelevant obstacles to efficiency.
On the other hand, changes can be a threat to the order and efficiency we have
already achieved. The new is not always better, and ignorant engineers can be more
dangerous than obstinate bureaucrats.
The fallacy of Uniformitarianism and Chesterton’s fence
In the matter of reforming things, as distinct from deforming them, there is one
plain and simple principle; a principle which will probably be called a paradox. There
exists in such a case a certain institution or law; let us say, for the sake of simplicity, a
fence or gate erected across a road. The more modern type of reformer goes gaily up
(cid:0)(cid:0)
35 Michael Ignatieff, Rethinking Open Society, pp ?i-?@, Central European University Press ([A?K)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

20 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
to it and says, "I don't see the use of this; let us clear it away." To which the more
intelligent type of reformer will do well to answer: "If you don't see the use of it, I
certainly won't let you clear it away. Go away and think. Then, when you can come
back and tell me that you do see the use of it, I may allow you to destroy it."
–G. K. Chesterton, The Thing (OVRV)
People tend to believe that the experience they have today has been the same
throughout history. That contemporary attitudes and opinions are natural and have
never changed and will never change.
We assume the peace we live under today emerges automatically, perhaps be-
cause of human nature. The social harmony we enjoy is taken for granted. The paved
streets and water and power lines maintained with taxes collected peacefully and ef-
ficiently are not perceived as any miracle of social engineering. Somehow this wealth
of peaceful cooperation seems natural to me, despite the fact that I reflexively curse
the idiot who always seems to be driving in front of me.
The fallacy of uniformitarianism is to believe that the social harmony we enjoy
today, especially in economically advanced nations, is natural and automatic. We
falsely believe that if we dismantle our cultural and public institutions, we will still
enjoy our current level of social cooperation and its resulting wealth. Some even be-
lieve that our cultural and civic institutions have always been the primary obstacles to
greater material prosperity and social harmony.
Ignorant of history, our software engineers are building technological worka-
rounds to fight corruption and inefficiency by eliminating escrow lawyers, and police,
and insurance salesmen with WebZ solutions. Engineers see the improvements they
can make by removing the cost of these middlemen without always understanding the
original reason for their existence.
Engineers see the corruption, the business friction, and they build systems to
eliminate it. But you shouldn’t mistake the catalyst for the friction. Friction in a system
is inevitable. So, in order to overcome the friction and achieve motion—achieve liquid-
ity in an economy—you need catalysts. Catalysts provide activation energy.
When synthesizing a chemical, in the lab or in our living cells, we often use a
chemical catalyst to start the reaction. Every cell in every living thing devotes much of
their activity to building chemical catalysts, like the ATP catalyst constructed in the
mitochondrion. The mitochondrion adds three phosphate ions to adenosine to build
ATP, adenosine-tri-phosphate. The third phosphate ion gives ATP an abundance of en-
ergy. ATP then jiggles around in the cell until it meets up with a protein with a phos-
phate receptor. The ATP bonds with the protein, dropping off its third phosphate ion,
giving the protein an energy kick. This gives the protein the activation energy to do its
protein-y job. Remove the ATP catalysts from a cell and it will quickly stop moving and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 21
die. Catalysts are the key to temporarily avoiding the inevitable deterioration the Sec-
ond Law of Thermodynamics promises—ordered systems degenerate toward disor-
der. We need to provide energy to catalysts so that our systems don’t stop.
Middlemen are the catalysts that exist to overcome the friction of economic cor-
ruption. Police, lawyers, and insurance salesmen eliminate threats to business activity
from different angles. These middlemen are paid to overcome these corruptions and
frictions. Unfortunately, they have an incentive to not entirely eliminate the corrup-
tion. Whether these overhead industries become corrupt themselves, or if they are
merely falsely identified with the corruption itself because of their close association,
we sometimes think that the middlemen are responsible for the business friction. We
often miss the original reason for their existence. “No greater mistake can be made
than to think that our institutions are fixed or may not be changed for the worse.”36
Remove the middlemen business catalysts and the economy will soon die. Liquid-
ity will dry up. A few people will unfairly lose on business deals, then no one will take
the risk to initiate a business deal. The goal should not be to eliminate these middle-
men. The goal is to make these industries more efficient. The goal is to automate
them, to eliminate their own corruption and friction.
Automating these middlemen functions makes them more efficient, like the
chemical catalysts in a cell. Unlike human middlemen, automated middlemen can be
designed so that they don’t contribute to the corruption they were designed to fight.
If we automate these processes, then we have the power to maintain these functions
for ourselves. Individuals become more autonomous and powerful. We can choose
the level of catalyst protection that we need.
Carelessly dismantling these institutions could be catastrophic. Socio-cultural ad-
vances from the past are necessary for successful business.
But ignoring the inefficiency and corruption of these institutions to protect en-
trenched hierarchical power will also lead to catastrophe. Decentralization and trans-
parency can save these institutions, making them more relevant and efficient.
Both sides are wrong when they fail to understand each other. We need to trans-
form our institutions to match the new technological advances, without losing the
value they currently provide.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
36 Charles Evans Hughes, Conditions of Progress in Democratic Government (?\A\), published by For-
gotten Books, [A?\.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

22 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
Obstacles to decentralization
For OW years the Bitcoin network has been running without any centralized over-
sight. No authority has ever stepped in to refund a single transaction. Many billions of
USD worth of bitcoin has been stolen and embezzled from centralized organizations
which provide service to customers using bitcoin. But the network itself has never
made a single mistake. No network transaction has ever sent the wrong quantity of
bitcoin or mistakenly sent anything to the wrong account. No digital token has ever
disappeared or was mistakenly duplicated. Not a single bug has been found to create
any type of accounting error in a system worth hundreds of billions of dollars.
This is a spectacular success. Bitcoin illustrates the power of decentralized coop-
eration and transparency.
Nevertheless, there has been no significant adoption and use of bitcoin currency
in the economy in the last decade. Neither has there been any serious use of Ethereum
smart contracts, or the InterPlanetary Filing System, or any of a host of other decen-
tralized PRP services that have been promised. These radically decentralized tools
have not pervaded the mainstream economy despite billions of dollars in investment.
Why not? What is missing?
In short, almost everything. We are still waiting for a single application, a killer
app for WebZ. What will be the killer app for the decentralized economy? The answer
is a DAO.37
The idea of a profitable DAO is to make a company which is governed autono-
mously by smart contracts and organized in a decentralized way, without any single
permanent governing authority, no concentrated ownership. Decentralized compa-
nies would give fair distributions of power to its workers, according to how they ben-
efit the group. The existence of diverse types of DAOs would drive the economic out-
put of the large-scale decentralized economy, justifying the existence of the other
decentralized overhead tools—like cryptocurrencies, smart-contract escrow, decen-
tralized insurance and justice.
But there aren’t any DAOs, yet, The crypto economy is hollow. Why? Well, partly
because the first DAO failed spectacularly.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
37 This language borrowed from a [A?J speech by Andreas Antonopolous,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OWIi-AVndgk (Retrieved K/@/[A)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 23
The ?@AB DAO
In RWOQ, within the first year that Ethereum created programmable contracts
which could autonomously govern the behavior of a decentralized organization, the
first DAO was built, called confusingly enough, The DAO. This RWOQ DAO was to be a
decentralized venture fund, set up as an organization based purely on code and smart
contracts. It did not have a conventional corporate structure, no incorporation, and
had no physical address or headquarters. All traditional control mechanisms employed
by principals in agency relationships had been entirely removed. People who worked
for the RWOQ DAO had a different kind of agency relationship. Workers were engaged
in a dynamic set of relationships that continuously self-organized around projects and
outcomes, not corporate hierarchies with implicit hierarchical biases.
The RWOQ DAO instantly attracted thousands of members and USrOoW million in
investment, Ox% of Ethereum’s total value. It failed almost as quickly. Within two
weeks, ZW% of the money, rxo million, was stolen, causing the Ethereum network to
collapse and reboot its network. The RWOQ DAO had a programming bug called re-en-
trancy, where two lines of code were in the wrong order.38 But that technical design
flaw was not its most serious problem. The system would have eventually failed more
spectacularly, because it was designed poorly on other levels. For example, if someone
ever gained oO% power in the system, they could have taken the money by outvoting
the rest of the members to invest the group’s money in their own worthless pet pro-
ject. Voting power could be purchased, so we know precisely how much money it
would cost to destroy the RWOQ DAO. If it were more successful, and lasted longer than
a month, someone would have eventually amassed the money to arbitrage the trivial
governance structure.
Since the failure of the original DAO, the community has been scrambling to pro-
vide new DAO alternatives. New DAO proposals appear almost quarterly in the RWRWs.
Most fail because of a lack of decentralized governance solutions.
Most organizations that use PRP technology are not decentralized and they are
not autonomous. They are governed by a centralized group of developers and owners.
The desire to invest in DAOs was not quelled by the failure of the RWOQ DAO. For ex-
ample, Aragon collected USrRo million within RQ minutes in a capped ICO39 in RWOb.
Since then, the group switched focus a few times, and developed one of the most
(cid:0)(cid:0)
38 Andreas Antonopolous and Gavin Wood, Mastering Ethereum, p. )[@, O’Reilley Publishing, [A?K.
39 An initial coin offering (ICO) is a decentralized version of an initial public offering (IPO), which allows
anyone with access to the internet to pseudonymously participate in the equity sale of a smart-con-
tract-enabled company or asset. The coins may be programmed with autonomous power in the com-
pany.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

24 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
sophisticated general DAO governance protocols in the blockchain space. That is a
backhanded compliment, though: their reputation system and legislative and judicial
governance protocols are trivial.40 In RWRW, Aragon declined to use their own protocol
to arbitrate an internal dispute, which is testimony to the lack of trust of their system
designers in their own system capabilities.
The RWOQ DAO has a lasting impact on emerging DAO designs. It creates core com-
monalities and associated path dependencies in future generations of DAOs.41 The
common denominator for all DAO token members is the unifying desire to optimize
the DAO token value. Accordingly, performance assessment in the DAO structure is
based on value optimization, not on hierarchical or political processes. On the upside,
token holders and contractors work towards a common goal of optimizing the DAO
and the token value. Non-performance reputational penalties can minimize racial or
cultural biases inasmuch as anonymity is maintained. Yet, the focus on the value en-
hancement of fungible tokens can lead to short-termism and may ignore ethical and
governance issues.
Creating a true DAO, one that is successful and stable, is a lot more difficult than
it sounds. Even a centralized company is difficult to create, though we have plenty of
successful centralized examples to copy. In recent history, the only long-term success-
ful examples of politically decentralized companies devoted to profit have been
Bitcoin and its permutations. We’re all holding our breaths wondering how long they
can defy gravity. We’re not impressed by how little agility they’ve demonstrated. The
Bitcoin network has not had much of a record of innovation, which is not surprising
(cid:0)(cid:0)
40 https://github.com/aragon/whitepaper (Retrieved J/@/[A[A.)
41 The idea of a path dependency is that a technology or a process may become entrenched and con-
tinue to be used even after more efficient or effective technologies emerge because of institutional
inertia, or the short-term costs of switching to the alternative. An example is the QWERTY keyboard
vs. the DVORAK set up. Standard computer keyboards use the QWERTY setup because the first com-
mercially successful typewriters used them. The design is measurably slower for typing in English, be-
cause more words have characters off of the home row and more words are typed with one hand than
DVORAK. It is argued this was designed intentionally, to eliminate key sticking in the original mechan-
ical typewriters. Such issues are not a concern with electronic typewriters and computer keyboards,
but the standard was stuck. Now QWERTY is so established that there is little chance of switching,
because further innovations have incorporated the QWERTY style, such as keyboard shortcuts like
CTRL-Z, X, C, & V for copy-pasting. In QWERTY these letters are all close together, but using them is
more awkward in DVORAK. As technological development moves down its path, processes become
more standardized depending on their history, leading to entrenchment and behavioral inertia. The
larger the institution, the more likely it will display path dependencies beyond what is rationally ex-
pected, which constrains advancement.
Martin Stack & Myles Gartland, “Path Creation, Path Dependency, and Alternative Theories of the
Firm”, Journal of Economic Issues, )J ([): ]KJ, ([AA)).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 25
considering its complete lack of formal governance, and the fact that its inventor has
remained anonymous.
Path dependencies
Path dependencies create a major obstacle to decentralizing our institutions and
businesses. Humans have psychological inertia, and cling to any familiar system, but
especially those that have given them comfort in the past. Groups have lived in hier-
archies since before civilization began. Our human history is one of organizing in cen-
tralized networks. We understand hierarchies on a deep animal level. It is reasonable
to fear the chaos that naturally follows the cataclysm from the collapse of a hierarchy.
The conscious intervention necessary to prevent the chaos is not as certain to occur
as the revolution and change of power.
Similarly, decentralized organizations that take advantage of our contemporary
advances in information technology allow global participation, blithely trading across
borders. This violates basic principles of territorial integrity in nations, which is a foun-
dational principle of international law.42 Forced imposition of a border change is an
act that traditionally justifies war. However, as society increasingly adopts powerful
new technologies, such as the cell phone or internet which cross borders with new
forms of collaboration and value creation, these traditional notions of protecting ter-
ritorial integrity by controlling the natural resources, products, services, and behavior
of its citizens become obstacles to improved efficiency in business.
In the early RWRWs, government-controlled regulation of the evolving digital asset
space is perhaps the leading obstacle to decentralization. The Securities and Exchange
Commission, among other regulatory agencies in the United States, is attempting to
fit decentralized technology solutions and their digital assets into the existing regula-
tory infrastructure. Carve-outs and safe harbors were discussed but not seriously con-
sidered. The emphasis of regulatory initiatives in the RWRWs was on securities tokens
and legal ways to trade such tokens in the then existing securities law infrastructure.
Government control of the industry was an indispensable aspect of the legal initia-
tives. Yet, decentralized technology solutions, at their core, negate external control,
censorship, and oversight. Accordingly, the then-proposed approaches largely under-
mined the evolution of decentralized technology. Without the ability to experiment in
a legally protected environment, decentralized products and technology cannot
(cid:0)(cid:0)
42 It is enshrined in Article [(]) of the UN Charter and has been recognized as customary international
law.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

26 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
evolve, and consumer protection rightly trumps decentralized product experimenta-
tion. Switzerland in the RWRWs has been at the forefront of legal experimentation with
decentralized infrastructure products and DAOs.
The regulatory infrastructure solutions for decentralized products and technology
of the early RWRWs is largely following the characteristics of the product issuers. Tokens
issued by government entities (government coins) are compliant with and followed
the legal environment established by the issuing government. Similarly, tokens issued
by corporations in a given jurisdiction (corporate coins), are designed to be compliant
with the legal guidance available at the time of their issuance in the given jurisdiction.
More decentralized products and technology solutions (people coins) typically do not
fit into such regulatory solutions in a given jurisdiction. As a result, the more decen-
tralized products that are more censorship resistant, autonomous, and cannot be con-
trolled by regulatory agencies, are largely left in a regulatory vacuum. The associated
legal uncertainty limits their expansion, reach, and evolution.
The regulation of government coins versus corporate coins versus people coins
bifurcates the established regulatory infrastructure for decentralized technologies.
Government coins and corporate coins are able to develop and evolve with regulatory
oversight. Governments, such as the PRC, are able to promote the use of the technol-
ogy through the tokens they sponsor and force users and merchants in their jurisdic-
tion to embrace the technology. The government sponsored use of the technology,
through government coins and corporate coins, also enable a flourishing ecosystem
that evolves around the government-sponsored decentralized technology solutions.
In the case of corporate coins, just as in other industries like the oil and gas industry,
corporate influences support and enable regulatory approaches and solutions they
could comply with, support, and control. Such corporate-driven legal solutions oper-
ate at the expense of more decentralized products and technology that are not always
as compliant with the centralized legal infrastructure for the cryptocurrency and
blockchain industry. People coins and the innovations they create are largely subject
to regulatory uncertainty and evolve much more slowly or not at all. As a result, evolv-
ing government coins and corporate coins create their own path dependencies and
engrained product deficiencies with suboptimal levels of decentralization.
These are some of the external and internal obstacles to building the decentral-
ized economy. But there is an even larger problem. We’re simply not ready to build a
DAO which can compete with centralized corporations. When someone tries to form
a centralized company, they are supported by an enormous infrastructure devoted to
helping them succeed. That infrastructure is called “all of civilization”. All our civilized
institutions have evolved over the centuries and millennia to make centralized busi-
ness a little easier and a little more efficient. The entire environment of the decentral-
ized economy needs to be built before it can support its first truly successful DAO.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 27
Overhead institutions are catalysts for the economy
“Environments are not just containers, but are processes that change the content
totally.” –Marshall McLuhan, American scholar, Volume Zo, p RWW (OVQo)
The modern legal system promises no one will steal from us in any stage of our
business. It regulates markets to create an efficient and level playing field without a
warlord tipping the scales. In developed countries, we don’t need to bribe anyone to
begin a new business arrangement—the licenses and certifications are publicly known
and transparently reported and audited. The invention of the modern police force
centralized personal defense. Instead of every individual constantly expending the en-
ergy to display our personal imperviousness to predation, we’ve concentrated the ef-
fort into a centralized institution which protects everyone, by outsourcing revenge.
The contemporary legal system needs to incorporate the new advances in infor-
mation technology. Or the WebZ vision of the future needs to build the efficiency of
our current legal system into its vision of the future economy. In the early RWRWs, de-
centralized legal infrastructure solutions are almost entirely missing. The incompati-
bility of decentralized technologies with the existing regulatory frameworks suggest
that decentralized legal infrastructure solutions should flourish. While some startups
are experimenting with ERC-RW tokens and forms of decentralized arbitration, such
solutions lack sufficient scale, decentralization, anonymity, and autonomy.
Cyber security attacks erode the trust that people might build from the sophisti-
cated cryptographic tools that are available. The open access of cryptocurrency-based
tools makes it nearly impossible to police cyber criminals in varied national jurisdic-
tions. Global trust in internet security is in steady decline, with the U.S. being signifi-
cantly more suspicious than average.43 This lack of trust is exacerbated by majority
ownership of traffic control in a few geographical monopolies. These monopolies cre-
ate information silos and constrain knowledge exchange. The resulting lack of compe-
tition and cooperation impedes innovation, including at the protocol level and dimin-
ished consumer protection and rights. Skype video-messaging and teleconferencing
service started with a decentralized PRP backbone (based on the decentralized music
sharing app, Kazaa). This PRP service distributed more than QQW million worldwide us-
ers by the end of RWOW.44 Skype was sold to Microsoft the next year. In RWOZ the Snow-
(cid:0)(cid:0)
43 Edelman (Jan [?, [A?K). [A?K Edelman Trust Barometer: Global Report, https://www.edel-
man.com/research/[A?K-edelman-trust-barometer (Retrieved June ?, [A[A).
44 Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/[J[A?]/global-social-networks-ranked-by-number-of-
users/ (Retrieved K/K/[A)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

28 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
den files revealed that Microsoft shared American and international users’ infor-
mation with U.S. security agencies.45 Whenever decentralized organizations pose a
threat of disruption to any established centralized industry, they will naturally face
competition and resistance.
The strong libertarian focus of some of the most influential WebZ developers
means the crypto community is extremely reticent to cooperate with mainstream in-
stitutions and corporations. This ornery streak extends to the lack of cooperation
within the crypto community on different projects. Many projects are attempting to
build the “Bitcoin killer” or the “Ethereum killer”. Instead of building compatible tech-
nologies in the service of interoperability, most are competing with each other, con-
tradicting the open source culture that should pervade the space if it has any hope of
thriving. But collaboration would require an environment with clear ground rules—an
overarching governance process that everyone could agree upon. Without such ba-
sics, the fraud and regulatory uncertainty that currently characterize the crypto com-
munity—which are certainly exaggerated by establishment media, but are still based
in reality—will inevitably continue. However, any such scheme of broad governance
over multiple PRP seems unlikely to emerge in the current climate, even though that
system is exactly what their mainstream centralized corporate competitors enjoy.
The current political system provides the material infrastructure so that our cen-
tralized businesses can run efficiently—taxes are peacefully collected to build roads to
help deliver our supplies, to provide electricity, water and sewers. It marshals a mili-
tary, to give us confidence our investments will not crumble in March each year, when
armies feel like pillaging. Our religious and educational institutions are designed to
make customers, workers, and partners who will behave well in all their dealings.
The contemporary political system should incorporate the new advances in infor-
mation technology. Otherwise the WebZ vision of the future needs to build at least
the features and social advantages of our current political system into its vision of the
economy. Otherwise the decentralized economy will merely be a parasite on the dying
host that is the traditional mainstream economy; in that case, once the host is dead,
the social advantages we enjoy today will be lost.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
45 “[N]ine months after Microsoft bought Skype, the NSA boasted that a new capability had tripled
the amount of Skype video calls being collected through Prism. Material collected through Prism is
routinely shared with the FBI and CIA, with one NSA document describing the program as a ‘team
sport’. […] In June [[A?)], the Guardian revealed that the NSA claimed to have ‘direct access’ through
the Prism program to the systems of many major internet companies, including Microsoft, Skype, Ap-
ple, Google, Facebook and Yahoo.”
Glenn Greenwald, Spencer Ackerman, Laura Poitras, Ewen MacAskill, & Dominic Rushe, "How Mi-
crosoft handed the NSA access to encrypted messages", The Guardian, London (?? July [A?)) Retrieved
[A July [A?).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 29
News media and other communication infrastructures have been influenced
throughout history to serve business. Early adoption by business has always driven
advances in electronic information technology. Some of the first financially successful
ventures in telegraph technology were commercial stock tickers for businesses. They
remained in use until the OVQWs when businesses became early adopters of personal
computers for telex transmissions. In the OPQWs transatlantic telegraph cables were
laid with the express purpose of providing London with market information from New
York exchanges to improve trade and reduce prices. The efficiency gains are estimated
to have been “equivalent to P percent of export value”.46 A large percentage of early
radio broadcasts throughout the world were market reports, especially through telex
technology, which adapted telegraphy to wireless radio transmissions for business.
Early adoption of telephones and later cellphones and smartphones, Blackberries for
texting and apps, etc., was driven by business uses.
In the decentralized economy, trusted news sources become even more im-
portant, as business contracts become more automated. Automated news services in
PRP systems are called oracles. Many oracles exist today, but most are centralized. To
make a DAO secure, many different trusted decentralized oracles need to be devel-
oped. (We’ll come back to this in Chapter V.)
Still more institutions have evolved over the centuries to subtly improve central-
ized business, including banking and underwriting. Most people have no sense of how
important underwriting and insurance is to business. Nothing happens in any business
transaction, in any market, without underwriting to improve its efficiency. Every trans-
action is a gamble on the future, and insurance gives people the confidence to take
the risk, which provides the liquidity to make the markets more efficient. (See Chapter
P.)
When these overhead institutions work well, they are extremely efficient, be-
cause business then uses them less. When the legal institutions work well, business is
less corrupt, so there is less need to appeal for justice. The better the system runs, the
more these institutions fade into the background.
The natural hope of most WebZ engineers is that these institutions can be auto-
mated away until they vanish. The hope is that self-regulating smart contracts will
never require an appeal to justice. Decentralized oracles will eliminate the need for
any original investigation from independent media. Automated systems will eliminate
the middleman. These hopes are largely misplaced.
The middleman provides an essential service. Business contracts are not getting
simpler as our technology becomes more sophisticated. Each successful business
(cid:0)(cid:0)
46 Claudia Steinwender, "Real Effects of Information Frictions: When the States and the Kingdom Be-
came United", American Economic Review, ?AK ()), pp @iJ–@\@, ([A?K).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

30 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
agreement leads to more complex arrangements for more sophisticated systems of
cooperation. If the services these middlemen provide can be automated away, they
most certainly will be. Many functions in society have been automated away in the
past, especially manual labor. But many types of middlemen have persisted. Why?
There are certain junctures in business where novel problems regularly arise when-
ever circumstances change. These problems require creative solutions, and people
step in to capitalize. These persistent junctures become business institutions.
The imagined future decentralized economy is missing almost all of the functions
these institutions provide. Without decentralized versions of these services, DAOs will
not be able to compete with centralized companies.
Summary
What’s missing from the decentralized economy? Almost everything.
What are the obstacles to decentralization? Most of the economy—most of the
world—is centralized and sees new structures as a threat to power. Many people can’t
imagine an alternative to centralization.
Is resistance futile? Certainly not. Decentralized organizations are as natural as
centralized organizations. In many situations they are superior and will outcompete
centralized institutions without the need for direct conflict.
Interoperability, the API economy, is most efficiently achieved, in the long run, on
decentralized platforms. Negotiations made on a level playing field are fairer, resolve
quicker, and encourage more business. When a centralized corporation owns the play-
ing field there is less incentive to participate, knowing they will always take a piece of
the action—as much as the market will bear. Monopolies are bad for the economy.
Centralized companies are already trying to build platforms according to decentralized
principles, like Google’s Play Store, and open-source design, such as TensorFlow.
As our experiences and decisions move online, our privacy is being diminished.
Our behaviors are monitored by computers, and our decisions are guided by them.
Auto insurance apps monitor our driving. Health insurance apps monitor our exercise
and diet. Credit card companies monitor our purchases. With the Covid-OV pandemic,
contact tracing apps are being instituted with continuous global monitoring of peo-
ples’ locations.47 Centralized companies are building the tools faster than decentral-
ized organizations, but people are resisting the threats to their privacy, making the
(cid:0)(cid:0)
47 Apple Newsroom announcement, April ?A, [A[A, “Apple and Google partner on COVID-?\ contact
tracing technology” https://www.apple.com/newsroom/[A[A/A]/apple-and-google-partner-on-
covid-?\-contact-tracing-technology/ (Retrieved K/\/[A). Since [A?\ Apple and Google have held \\%
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

Chapter ) – Future Decentralization (cid:0) 31
apps less effective.48 People more willingly participate with decentralized apps, if
their information remains under their personal control. ZK proofs allow people to do
exactly that, sharing complex information for the purposes of social improvement,
while maintaining control of their personal information.
The RWRW Covid-OV pandemic was the first ROst century global crisis demanding
global coordination of peoples’ information, but it certainly won’t be the last. Govern-
ment by algorithm is already here.49 Reared in a centralized world, we reflexively turn
to centralized solutions. But a decentralized approach is more effective for such global
problems. Decentralized networks encourage interoperability through bureaucratic
transparency. This allows us to integrate data (on human movement, medical infor-
mation, and more variables we haven’t anticipated) more effectively than if one
source attempts to dictate the development. With the privacy controls of decentral-
ized technologies, with open source culture allowing public audits to guarantee secu-
rity, we promote an atmosphere of participation. 50
Decentralized developers are moving remarkably fast, but they still have much to
improve. Bitcoin and Ethereum have provided primitive decentralized versions of cur-
rency and business contracts. How do we build decentralized versions of all the rest
of the institutions that business and society rely on? What should we expect to see
before we can confidently participate in the decentralized economy? The rest of this
book analyzes these questions and provides a guide for navigating the future decades
as we experiment and fail with decentralized structures, as we filter out the central-
ized impurities that our flawed understanding of decentralization will inevitably ex-
pose.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
share of the global smartphone mobile operating system market. https://www.statista.com/statis-
tics/[J[@\K/global-market-share-held-by-mobile-operating-systems-since-[AA\/ (Retrieved K/K/[A).
48 Charlotte Jee, “K million people, ?] alerts: why some covid-?\ apps are staying silent”, MIT Technol-
ogy Review, July ?A, [A[A https://www.technologyreview.com/[A[A/AJ/?A/?AAiA[J/K-million-peo-
ple-?]-alerts-why-some-covid-?\-apps-are-staying-silent/ (Retrieved K/K/[A)
49 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Government_by_algorithm (Retrieved K/K/[A).
50 “We should have a global, decentralized system for collecting medical, movement, interaction and
lifestyle data from everyone on the planet–and methods to analyze it in a secure, anonymous way.
Statistical and AI analysis should be guided democratically by everyone contributing data […] without
sacrificing privacy.“ –AI researcher Ben Goertzel in “Decentralized Tech Will Be Ready for Humanity’s
Next Crisis”, Coindesk, Aug K, [A[A https://www.coindesk.com/decentralized-tech-will-be-ready-for-
humanitys-next-crisis (Retrieved K/K/[A)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

32 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Future Decentralization
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782201

