Chapter ) - Historiography 1
The Importance of History in Decentralization
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
Chapter 9 emphasizes the role of history in the creation of decentralized organiza-
tions. Access to historical records creates transparency and accountability and enables
punishment and rewards in decentralized organizations which changes the motiva-
tions of members from a focus on immediate rewards to the future, encouraging de-
layed gratification and sacrifice for the good of the group. Historical review changes
the game theoretical perspective from a single stage game, to a repeated game. This
leads to more efficient cooperation instead of internal competition. Review helps cre-
ate a decentralized history for decentralized organizations, which gives them momen-
tum. History is the basis for making governance more effective. History brings clarity
and stability.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Chapter 9. Historiography
We are not makers of history. We are made by history.
--Martin Luther King, Jr., Strength to Love (JKLM)
Dual to cryptography, which is the process of writing secrets, historiography is the
process of distilling and sharing information publicly. Historiography is the way you
choose to write the past—how it’s recorded, what information is stressed as im-
portant, how it is presented. Do we present history as a list of the important decisions
kings and queens have made, or do we stress the social developments that provoked
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

2 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
those decisions, or do we point to the technological innovations that fomented those
social changes?
In business, your choice of historiography determines what past events are im-
portant to consider when making economic decisions. Your historiography is your per-
spective. To achieve liquidity, marketplaces must be trustworthy. They need momen-
tum. It’s not enough to achieve motion in any particular instance. Momentum must
be observed to give trust to the marketplace. These observations need to be collected
in a history to give them weight and meaning.
In decentralized organizations, governance is the key ingredient for driving effec-
tive collaboration towards a goal. Governance relies on meaningful reputation to de-
cide who or what to focus on. The meaning of reputation is determined by its history
and how that history is analyzed and presented. Information, especially through news
sources, controls a decentralized organization.
How is our attention focused and organized? Which details are important? Which
narrative do we follow? What is the internet search engine for the decentralized PXP
environment? How do you tell the story of what the data means? How trustworthy,
how efficient, how effective is any particular DAO, compared with other DAOs? To
answer all of these questions, you need to answer how history is recorded and dis-
seminated.
The choice of historiography is the design choice of the architecture of higher-
order information storage. The purpose of the judicial branch is to finalize information
storage, to decide what is true. The architecture of history, historiography, is the ar-
chitecture for judicial governance. Historiography is our method for putting the au-
thoritative stamp on what is true. This stamp sets the stage to analyze our situation
and decide what to do next (legislative governance/information processing), then to
do it (executive governance/information transmission).
In this chapter we describe how to build decentralized news services for DAOs,
known as oracles. Incidentally, this explains how to revitalize our failing news media,
the vaunted Fourth Estate, and educational institutions that are essential to the func-
tioning of the larger DAOs of our democratic societies, using the principles of decen-
tralization.
Oracles
In the decentralized economy, trusted news sources become even more im-
portant than in the traditional economy. Business contracts are becoming more auto-
mated, reacting immediately to news events. Automated news services in PXP systems
are called oracles.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

Chapter ) - Historiography (cid:0) 3
Many oracles exist today which work with PXP projects, such as Provable (for-
merly Oraclize) and Town Crier, which are centralized (Provable uses Amazon’s Web
Services virtual machine and Town Crier uses Intel). These centralized oracles are rec-
ommended for any contemporary PXP project, because as of X‘X‘, no decentralized
oracle is robust enough to be trusted for valuable transactions. To make DAOs secure
in the long run, however, many different types of trusted decentralized oracles need
to be developed.
Why do you need a decentralized oracle? The same reason all the other institu-
tions that business relies on need to be decentralized before a DAO can reach its full
potential. Any time your DAO relies on a centralized feature, that is a centralized point
of failure that is a threat to the survival of the organization. That means the system is
technically centralized. In that case it would be more efficient to completely centralize
around the single point of failure the DAO is automated around. The effort you’re
making to decentralize and give each member redundant power is wasted, because
the point of failure might as well be the supreme leader.
For example, if the DAO relies on a centralized oracle, that means someone in the
oracle’s hierarchy has the power to decide what information to share. A DAO is auto-
mated by its smart contracts to rely on the information coming from the oracle. The
DAO is automatically triggered to make monetary transactions based on that infor-
mation. Eventually, the people who have the relevant power in the centralized oracle
will become aware of the power they have over the DAO. Eventually there will be an
opportunity to exploit that information. And from a game theory perspective, given
the competitive nature of capitalism, they are right to take advantage of that power.
You can never achieve a perfectly decentralized system, any more than any or-
ganization’s hierarchy can ever become perfectly centralized. There is always going to
be a problem and weakness somewhere with any practical instantiation of any project.
And machines don’t need to be perfect in every regard to work. But if we can identify
a weakness, we can address it.
Theoretically, you can make overarching centralized laws dictating such exploita-
tion shouldn’t happen. In fact, there are many laws related to this sort of insider in-
formation. But the very existence of this opportunity for arbitrage means systems will
evolve around whatever rules exist to exploit the advantage. Instead of legislating, the
proper response is to engineer a better system. More to the point, robust decentral-
ized oracles would be superior.
A robust decentralized oracle would find better information. The wisdom of the
crowd can be employed to discover the truth. Averaging information is typically better
for any complex situation, since they’re less subject to the prejudices of the individual,
who has more limited information. All things being equal, the individual mistakes that
overestimate some measurement are balanced by the individuals that underestimate.
Decentralized oracles are more reliable. Their failures will be smaller, because they
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

4 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
are more diluted through averaging. Centralized oracles have more singular sources
of information, leading to higher variance in their mistakes.
Condorcet’s Jury Theorem
A rigorous explanation of the wisdom of the crowd was first introduced in Jabc by
Condorcet. The same French revolutionary genius whose paradox (Chapter d) pre-
vents us from finding a perfect democratic voting method also gives us this argument
in favor of democracy. Condorcet’s Jury Theorem says bigger democracies are better
than having smaller groups in charge. Sort of. Condorcet demonstrated that larger
groups of slightly intelligent people are better than smaller groups for democratically
finding the truth.1
Here’s the setup: Suppose you have a group that is going to vote on an issue. Also
suppose the group is slightly intelligent, meaning the average group member is more
than cJ% likely to get the right answer, rather than the wrong answer. In this case, the
more people you use to vote on the issue, the more likely they are to come to the
truth. The bigger the network, the more efficiently it will come to the correct answer.
The crowd’s answers are much wiser than the average individual’s answer.
Since it’s a rigorous logical result, it also is balanced by the fact that larger groups
of slightly stupid people are worse than smaller groups of stupid people. The idiocy of
the mob is the counterbalance to the wisdom of the crowd. Stupid, here, is defined as
being wrong slightly more than half the time. It’s not clear whether any mortal escapes
that assignation in sum—perhaps we’re all slightly stupid in the larger scheme of
things. But in some areas, we can train ourselves to be at least slightly competent. So
an oracle DAO needs to filter its network to guarantee the average member is correct,
at least slightly more than they are incorrect. Then the larger and more decentralized
the network becomes, the quicker and more certainly it will converge on the truth.
SchellingCoin protocol
One decentralized approach to generating oracle information is based on the
SchellingCoin protocol, explained for Ethereum in X‘Jd by Vitalik Buterin. The idea is
to have your Oracle DAO members stake their reputation tokens on their answer to a
question a DApp is asking. Then you reward those closer to the resulting median value
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 Bernard Grofman, Guillermo Owen, and Scott Feld, “Thirteen Theorems in Search of the Truth”, The-
ory and Decision, CD, pp EFC-EGH, (C)HJ).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

Chapter ) - Historiography (cid:0) 5
and punish those whose answers deviated further. The median answer is the Schelling
point, a concept from game theory.
For example, suppose an insurance DAO needs to know whether to pay out to
policy holders for a hurricane. The policy stipulates that it will pay out if the wind in
your coastal town is higher than J‘‘ mph. Oracle DAO members may post their esti-
mate of the top wind speed in Virginia Beach last Thursday and encumber their repu-
tation tokens in a smart contract. When the deadline to report the wind speed arrives,
the smart contract calculates the median value of all submissions, weighted by the
stakes. Then the encumbered reputation tokens are redistributed to the group, with
more tokens given to members who answered closer to the median, and less for those
whose answers were farther away.
There are infinitely many choices for the redistribution process. The original pro-
posal suggested minting some amount 𝑁 of new tokens and distributing them to those
with answers between the Xcth and acth percentile. Incentivization can be optimized
by selecting over the set of all designs. Different questions and DAO behaviors should
have different reward schemes. For instance, if all members are behaving honestly,
and the answers are satisfactory within a predetermined tolerance, your reputation
shouldn’t be arbitrarily reassigned because you were a tiny fraction of the median
value further away than the majority. In that case everyone should earn a share of the
new reputation.
What protocols are followed in answering any particular oracle questions should
be determined by the experts on the particular subject. Giving the experts, them-
selves, control of their own organization is better than relying on a static centralized
hierarchy. The experts know best how to game their own system, and how to prevent
gaming to protect their hard-earned reputation. The experts will find the most effi-
cient and secure methodology for providing trustworthy answers.
Assuming there is no systemic bias in the members, meaning that the group is
diverse and decentralized, the median should be close to the truth, so Oracle DAO
participants are incentivized to answer as honestly as they can. Fees are later distrib-
uted among the Oracle DAO members proportionate to their reputation holdings.
This approach may also serve as a forecasting device. Members would stake their
reputation tokens on bets on future events, making the DAO into a more literal oracle
from mythology.
Though decentralization improves information discovery, it further improves
when you filter out the bad sources of information. All things are not equal. Every
network has biases that need to be filtered out. Reputation, governance, and review
provide a stable system for filtering the bad sources of information and improving ac-
curacy.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

6 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
Unfortunately, robust decentralized oracles don’t exist, yet. Proposals have been
well funded by ICOs since X‘Ja, but we have little confidence in any scheme currently
being built. Chain.link has a protocol that demonstrates proof of concept—the tech-
nology exists to build a decentralized oracle. But the difference between theory and
practice is often vast.
Put simply, decentralized oracles are DAOs, so they still lack the proper incentive
structure and governance processes and history that all DAOs suffer from. Until the
decentralized protocol is secure and robustly enacted, it is better to rely on centralized
oracles, and make sure your network doesn’t grow to gain such a large monetary value
that an incentive arises for the centralized newsfeed to manipulate the data. A decen-
tralized oracle is not secure until it has significant momentum and history—an oracle
is not even truly decentralized until this is achieved, until it has a large network of
active members.
When sophisticated DAOs that represent banking and lending and insurance fi-
nally emerge, the structure will be easy to mutate to adapt to properly motivate and
govern oracle DAOs. Unfortunately, oracle DAOs and deFi DAOs rely on each other for
their very existence. Which will come first, the chicken or the egg? Mixing two more
metaphors, the skeleton of our proposal for priming the pump is detailed at the end
of Chapter d, above. People first have to prove their worth in a development period,
before they become invaluable to other DAOs and can charge fees for their services.
News and education
Centralized civic institutions always become corrupt in time. Then this corruption
becomes obvious once a new technology disrupts their operation, revealing their
weaknesses. Today, trust in the news media has cratered due to the corruption of the
institution.
People periodically give up their power of information transmission to centralized
institutions which are more effective and efficient. These institutions become corrupt
after their hierarchies centralize and ossify, then new technology allows people to by-
pass these centrally controlled media institutions. It used to be that a far greater per-
centage of people were publishers. Letter writing was relatively decentralized among
anyone literate who could afford ink and paper. Then book-making concentrated the
power of information storage throughout medieval Europe in the clergy, as teams of
monks were devoted to the task. Economies of scale made it prohibitively expensive
to produce a book of comparable quality without going through the Church. Europe
trusted in the institution of the Christian hierarchy which became corrupt in time and
eventually stultified individual progress. With the power of information creation and
storage, the Church had the power of making history, which is ultimately the power
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

Chapter ) - Historiography (cid:0) 7
of thought, as was used famously against Bruno and Galileo. The Church’s corruption
was revealed when the new technology of the printing press unleashed the Protestant
Reformation, under which the Catholic hierarchy collapsed and reformed.
The printing press automated book making, so that a few people could do the job
of hundreds of monks. Every small community of a few hundred people had compet-
ing printing presses.2 This gave people power to make local broadsheets so that local
newspapers could run local stories written by local citizens on local interests. Natu-
rally, power eventually concentrated again, through economies of scale, until a few
global corporations now primarily run global stories catering to globally powerful in-
terests.
Throughout history, advances in technology give individuals more power to
spread their information to more people, but unchecked competition accumulates
power in hierarchies of more successful groups. We give our individual power to insti-
tutions which initially serve us more effectively and more efficiently. But as these in-
stitutions age, they become more corrupt. This is revealed as new technology disrupts
their operations, as the internet is currently doing.
Today global news media institutions of all types are being revealed as weak and
corrupt. Unprofessionally produced stories reveal the major professional media cor-
porations are failing to provide unbiased and relevant information for their average
consumer. These unprofessional stories are spread with the new Web X.‘ technolo-
gies, such as Twitter, YouTube, and Wikipedia, displaying this corruption widely.
If we don’t build transparent democratic institutions to replace the corrupt insti-
tutions, new opaque centralized institutions will. Already, Facebook, YouTube, and
Twitter are creating secret algorithms that control what type of story can be spread
through their platforms, with absolutely no democratic power of oversight. To prevent
the corruption such centralized control inevitably leads to, we must foster transpar-
ency and individual autonomy over information. Powerful decentralized media insti-
tutions need to be built, using dynamic governance design principles to keep them
stable and responsive. How do we use PXP tools to achieve this?
Decentralization has always been a crucial factor in manufacturing the news. So-
cial truth can only be discovered using diverse and decentralized sources. What is a
fact? What facts are important? The ultimate answer is, valuable knowledge affects
people’s lives and experiences and decisions; it helps humanity. How do we best or-
ganize news collection and dissemination to create valuable knowledge?
(cid:0)(cid:0)
2 For example, by CDDO, less than a century after Gutenberg’s original printing press, Geneva had more
than JOO printing presses and CG,OOO citizens, for an average of C printing press per DG people. Eliza-
beth Eisenstein, The Printing Press as an Agent of Change, Cambridge University Press, p. VCO, (C)G)).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

8 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
Traditionally, a healthy news media, our fourth estate, relies on a variety of com-
peting companies. Truth discovery in any market, including the marketplace of ideas,
is more effective and efficient when news aggregators are more decentralized. When
there are J‘ newspapers reporting on a story, a more accurate historical picture
emerges than when one newspaper reports on the story J‘ times. “The wisdom of the
crowd” is the phrase that distills the fact that this diversity improves the focus and
accuracy of the information reported, and it improves as it becomes more diverse,
from the level of companies all the way down to the individual. Newspapers, radio,
and movies, from television to internet platforms, diversity of media company owner-
ship contributes to diversity of viewpoint and serves more audience interests, from
local to national to global audiences and between groups at each scale.
On the one hand, advances in information technology have been regularly im-
proving our ability to disseminate news and history to the masses for centuries, in-
creasing the quantity of stories and the number of people they reach.
On the other hand, economies of scale naturally lead media companies to merge
and concentrate power in territorial monopolies and trusts. American faith in media
has reliably fallen in direct correlation with the consolidation of broadcasting power,
as long as active statistics have been studied. Since the JKK‘s with the Telecommuni-
cations Act of JKKL, and especially with several decisions by the FCC in the X‘‘‘s,
there has been a string of deregulation which has allowed global companies to in-
crease their power in local communities. In X‘‘a, the FCC voted to eliminate media
ownership rules that included a law forbidding a single company from owning both a
newspaper and a television or radio station in the same city.3 Since then, iHeartMedia
(formerly Clear Channel Communications) grew to JX‘‘ radio stations. In JKbM the top
c‘ companies owned K‘% of the media and entertainment industry in the U.S.4, com-
prising businesses that produce and distribute movies, television, commercials,
streaming content, audio recordings, radio, newspapers, books, video games, and sup-
plementary services and products. By X‘JX, K‘% was controlled by the top L media
conglomerations. As an application of Zipf’s law, the values scale roughly exponen-
tially, with AT&T owning roughly twice as much as Comcast, which is worth twice as
much as Walt Disney Corp, then Viacom, then Fox. Without external regulating forces,
this is the natural and predictable result for centralizing forces under competition.
AT&T Comcast Disney ViacomCBS
Figure J: X‘JK valuations of the top media corporations follow Zipf's Law.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
3 Labaton, Stephen, “Plan Would Ease Limits on Media Owners”, The New York Times, CH October
EOOG.
4 Lutz, Ashley, “These F Corporations Control )O% Of The Media In America". Business Insider, CV June
EOCE.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

Chapter ) - Historiography (cid:0) 9
The most obvious problem with news consolidation is that national or interna-
tional centralized corporations do not devote the same degree of focus to the inter-
ests of the local communities they serve.5 Again, love doesn’t scale. Diversity of view-
points is diminished when power is concentrated. Editorial freedom is decreased.
News corporations certainly must value accuracy and truth in their reporting; but they
also must consider what news stories and perspectives will attract and maintain ad-
vertising, what positions serve their owners’ interests. A mega trust conglomeration,
like GE and Comcast each owning half of NBC, diminishes market liquidity with large
scale static power relations which leverage the increased internal firm efficiencies
through economies of scale, leading to frictions and corruption that undermine the
efficiency of the larger market.
Wide scale decentralization of power in the media will not collapse the power of
centralized corporations, any more than file sharing services like Napster and Bit-
Torrent6 collapsed the power of the centralized music companies. These disruptive
technologies merely transformed how entertainment is consumed and business is
done. The entertainment industry is more powerful and pervasive in our global culture
than ever before. Decentralization is more efficient for empowering individuals in
every way. It doesn’t take power from centralized actors, it increases everyone’s
power. Decentralization is only a threat to those who refuse to participate in the new
collaborative networks and embrace the new tools of communication at our disposal.
Musicians and record companies now have more influence in their fans’ personal lives
through social media. Decentralization creates new opportunities for collaboration at
a higher level.
Simultaneous with the consolidation of traditional media outlets in the X‘‘‘s,
Web X.‘ companies like Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube decentralized content crea-
tion while retaining centralized ownership and general control. This centralized con-
trol had the same effect in media communication that it did in commerce with Amazon
and Alibaba—users go largely unregulated until a major problem comes to the atten-
tion of the central authority. Fake news generators, trolls, fact checkers, and citizen
(cid:0)(cid:0)
5 The Communications Act of C)JV mandated that the FCC must act in the interest of the "public con-
venience, interest, or necessity." The FCC argued in EOOF that consolidation would bring more focus
on local news, because the larger organizations would have more resources. This argument failed in
practice, as there was an average decrease exceeding CO% of local news stories within the first year of
transfer of ownership. Obar, Jonathan (EOO)). "Beyond cynicism: A review of the FCC's reasoning for
modifying the newspaper/broadcast cross-ownership rule". Communication Law & Policy. CV (V): VG)–
DED.
6 Hundreds of decentralized file sharing programs and communities have evolved to avoid centralized
legal restrictions. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timeline_of_file_sharing for a list of some of the
major historical developments.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

10 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
reporters now unite into communities within hours and scatter just as quickly, thanks
to platforms such as Twitter and Reddit which leverage the new information technol-
ogy to tap the talent of the masses to generate news content. Without editorial con-
trol, the content is self-evidently unreliable. People rely on unconscious algorithms
which use popularity to determine what is authoritative content. But the lessons of
the Folk Theorems again arise, to remind us that such algorithms can always be
gamed. A more effective means of distilling what information is important is required.
To handle the profusion of information created by empowering the populace with de-
centralized content creation, we need a decentralized solution.
A central authority is perfectly well incentivized to ignore minor problems which
only partially eat into their profits, as long as they maintain ultimate control of profits.
When users are given more control of their content, decentralized regulation can be
more effective, with immediate policing and protocol changes. With proper reputa-
tion design, history and momentum can be built to filter the information more pro-
ductively. With decentralized governance, where all members have a proper balance
of power to police their platforms, regulation of these decentralized platforms can be
more effective. Stories can be properly evaluated, with proportionately increased or
decreased visibility according to their merit, without censoring them.
News organizations with greater power decentralization have been proposed
such as WikiNews (funded by the same non-profit Wikimedia Foundation that pub-
lishes Wikipedia), the Decentralized News Network (DNN), and Steemit (X‘JL). All of
these examples appear to us to have failed to gain wide adoption due to a lack of
ambition. The goal should be to empower individuals with greater ability to communi-
cate and cooperate.
Imagine a hybrid mix of social media platforms (like Facebook or LinkedIn) with
the news and entertainment media corporations (like BBC or New York Times). Instead
of a paywall, newspapers should be encouraging participation. If you read many arti-
cles on a particular subject you are more expert in that subject. If you comment pro-
ductively on articles, or if you create the content, you are more expert. If your discus-
sions stimulate more discussions and more content, you are more of an expert. If an
article generates more meaningful, reputable connections, then the article is more
valuable. If it doesn’t, it isn’t. Your expertise, your reputation, is based on whether you
are helping create content or bringing attention to something that actually matters—
meaning it is connected to profitable enterprises. If you create content that does not
connect to something profitable, or if you promote such unproductive knowledge, es-
pecially if you are a troll, your reputation will not grow in the DAO which values other
behaviors and polices their reputation properly. Different definitions of what profita-
ble means, will lead to different types of reputation or expertise that people strive to
attain, and different measures of power in different endeavors with separate DAOs.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

Chapter ) - Historiography (cid:0) 11
Major news corporations have the opportunity to rival the power of Facebook by
decentralizing their institutions. People could have news accounts that keep track of
how many articles they’ve read, how many comments they’ve made, on which sub-
jects, with a Reddit style accounting system of up and downvotes7 for how well their
contributions are appreciated, by which people, who have how much and what type
of reputation. How many articles have you initiated? How much do those articles con-
tribute to further comments and articles? Each article is weighted, based on how much
extra content it generates, and recursively, based on how influential that content ul-
timately proves to be.
Every software programmer understands how important the contributions to
Stack Overflow8 are, but these contributions are not rewarded by anything but brag-
ging rights. If we can find a fair way to value such contributions, it would contribute to
a more effective and efficient system of collaboration. Following the principles of
building secure and meaningful reputation from Chapter L, articles must have a foun-
dational meaning in fungible currency. New reputation should only be minted when
the articles are connected to profitable endeavors—advertising, paid analyses, new
protocols that are relied upon for decentralized business contracts. Then other con-
tributions gain valuable reputation if they are linked through references.
The exact process of Steps J-a for the Software Review DAO in Chapter d can be
cloned to build a news story review DAO. Reviewers could judge stories’ veracity ac-
cording to the standards the News DAO chooses. As before, reputation in the News
DAO becomes valuable once News DApps steer viewership to stories based on your
News DAO reviews. Then media sites will pay fees to get their stories reviewed more
quickly. Reviewers will be incentivized to give honest reviews despite fees, because
the reputational system rewards members mostly based on future fees. Unlike cen-
tralized platforms, like Twitter, which don’t fairly share profits or power with their
members, policing can be properly incentivized in a DAO, to discourage reviewers who
erode the integrity of the system. The success of this system, however, will depend on
the effectiveness of the choice of protocols which govern the DAO.
The purpose of news media is education. Such a system, which takes advantage
of our new power in information technology, can track our attainment of expertise (or
(cid:0)(cid:0)
7 Better yet, they would build an automated system of staking your reputation on your up or down
vote using some of the methods explored in Chapters F, G, and Section ).V, below.
8 Stack Overflow is a social media platform for computer science professionals which promotes good
questions and answers with a gamified upvote system similar to Reddit where users can earn badges.
It has become so valuable in programming circles, they joke that the solution to any new software
programming problem is to copy code from Stack Overflow.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

12 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
lack of attainment) more accurately than our traditional systems of professional licen-
sures or college degrees. Tracking and aggregating our reputations in various DAOs
can build a more accurate picture of our expertise and experiential gaps than our tra-
ditional educational institutions have. The expertise that has evolved in the century of
public education9 would be essential to designing effective curricula. Meaningless cer-
tification and licensure programs would be quickly revealed as the worthless pursuits
they are.
Notably, the transparency and openly reviewable nature of a DAO greatly adds to
the trustworthiness of the system. Being eternally open to audits and reviews from
anyone on the planet greatly improves the integrity of the system. Such improvements
to transparency and accountability in the institutions of media and education have the
opportunity for improving many aspects of society.
Such transparency is a hallmark of the open source culture that is a pillar of the
WebM movement. Unfortunately, the open source culture makes no sense.
Open source culture requires a culture of respect for history
The open source culture of the WebM movement is absolutely essential to the
goals of decentralizing the economy. Transparency is crucial in a decentralized net-
work. Every function needs to be publicly auditable for people to trust it. Without a
central authority to approve it, unexpected malicious behavior can be built into any
opaque code. The open source culture has been extremely successful in generating
useful distributed applications which are essential to the functioning of Web X.‘. An
open source environment is much more innovative.
But open source culture makes no sense from a business perspective. Whenever
we’ve tried to explain the open source culture to a nontechnical business person
we’ve been met with incredulity. It might make sense in a fantasy world utopia, where
we imagine no scarcity, where everyone is an angel who shares freely with no expec-
tation of enjoying the rewards of their labor. But it certainly doesn’t make sense in our
capitalist business world, where the incentive structures address our essential, base
instinct of selfishness that has preserved life for more than a billion years. Open source
makes no sense from an economic perspective. So why do people do it? From the
(cid:0)(cid:0)
9 The institution of education is as old as civilization, but the current system of compulsory public
secondary schools started around C)CO during the Progressive Movement in the U.S. The majority of
the U.S. public first earned high school diplomas in C)VO. Jurgen Herbst, The Once and Future School:
Three Hundred and Fifty Years of American Secondary Education (C))F)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

Chapter ) - Historiography (cid:0) 13
game theory perspective, the current open source culture advocated in the WebM
movement is not sustainable in the long term.
Unless we marry it with a culture of respect for history.
The way to build sustainable incentives for fostering open source culture is to
simultaneously foster a culture which acknowledges the contributions of the past. Ac-
ademics of all stripes have lived in an open source culture for centuries, even millen-
nia. Like WebM, academia thrives on transparency and open collaboration with
strangers. Periods when societies are less transparent with their ideas, less collabora-
tive, are usually referred to as Dark Ages. Open source culture has always been the
lifeblood of progress, in societies around the globe, throughout history. But to sustain
that open culture, a culture of respect for the past simultaneously evolves, so resent-
ment doesn’t build. The solution to the game theory conundrum of how to incentivize
a player to freely give up their intellectual property at one stage of a repeated game,
is by guaranteeing a reward in a future stage, by fostering a culture of acknowledge-
ment of past contributions. The players then seek the future rewards of fame by freely
distributing their work in the present.
Some academic subjects have stronger cultures respecting history, such as philos-
ophy and theology and especially the law, as evidenced by the density of footnote
references in any paper. Some are weaker, such as science and especially mathemat-
ics, where typically a few essential references are perfunctorily tacked on at the end
of their introduction.
It’s not efficient to be constantly conscious of the source of our ideas. It’s easier
to simply state your ideas and build your arguments without referencing each idea’s
debt to previous thinkers. It’s unnatural to have a culture of respect for history, and
needs to be consciously policed—it’s another of the essential catalyst institutions
which needs to be built into the decentralized economy.
But the new advances in information technology allow us to create a more so-
phisticated system of acknowledging minute past contributions than previously imag-
ined possible, with digitally accurate, automated accounting methods.
Let’s take a final brief digression into technical territory to explain how these new
architectures are built.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

14 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
Review gives momentum
Mathematical analyses of the different ways the network of references can be
weighted makes it possible to design protocols for promoting the goals each particular
DAO happens to value. This network of references is technically referred to as a cita-
tion graph. As indicated in Chapter a, governance needs to be designed in harmony
with the values of the group. A full example is beyond the scope of this text. However,
the elements of citation graph analysis are quite basic, similar to how all of the sym-
bolic logic involved in the most complex smart contracts boils down to understanding
Figure 2: The forum as a weighted directed acyclic graph (WDAG)
the NOT and AND operators.
The set of all posts and comments in a News DAO can be interpreted from an
abstract perspective as a weighted directed acyclic graph (WDAG). This technical math
jargon is the term for a relatively simple concept in graph theory, which underlies the
mathematical analysis of any network.
Figure M: Elements of graphs
A graph is a mathematical term which distills the crucial elements of a network. A
graph consists of two collections: a set of vertices (the dots, or the nodes, or the posts,
or the members of the network) and a set of edges (connections, or references, or
citations, or transmission lines in a network). If we add an arrow to an edge, indicating
one post is referencing another, the graph becomes a directed graph. A graph has a
cycle if M vertices are connected to each other in order, with vertex A connected to
vertex B which is connected to vertex C which is connected back to vertex A. Citation
graphs, or reference graphs, don’t have cycles, since an older post cannot reference
newer posts before they exist. We call such graphs acyclic. Finally, we can allow a post
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

212 Chapter9 Historiography
values of the group. A full example is beyond the scope of this text. However, the
elements of citation graph analysis are quite basic, similar to how all of the sym-
boliclogicinvolvedinthemostcomplexsmartcontractsboilsdowntounderstand-
ingtheNOTandANDoperators.
The set of all posts and comments in a News DAO can be interpreted from an
abstract perspective as a weighted directed acyclic graph (WDAG) (see Figure 9.2).
Thistechnicalmathjargonisthetermforarelativelysimpleconceptingraphthe-
ory,whichunderliesthemathematicalanalysisofanynetwork.
Figure9.2:Theforumasaweighteddirectedacyclicgraph(WDAG).
A graph is a mathematical term that distills the crucial elements of a network
(seeFigure9.3).Agraphconsistsoftwocollections:asetofvertices(thedots,or
thenodes,ortheposts,orthemembersofthenetwork)andasetofedges(connec-
tions, or references, or citations, or transmission lines in a network). If we add an
arrow to an edge, indicating one post is referencing another, the graph becomes a
directedgraph.Agraphhasacycleifthreeverticesareconnectedtoeachotherin
order,withvertexAconnectedtovertexB,whichisconnectedtovertexC,whichis
connectedbacktovertexA.Citationgraphs,orreferencegraphs,don’thavecycles,
since an older post cannot reference newer posts before they exist. We call such
graphsacyclic.Finally,wecanallowaposttoindicatepreciselyhowimportantits
Chapter ) - Historiography (cid:0) 15
vertex/post
to indicate precisely how important its connections are, how important the older posts
are, by weighting the references. When we attach weights to the edges/references,
the forum of all posts/comments becomes a weighted directed acyclic graph.
edge/reference graph with cycles
DAG
Figure9.3:Elementsofgraphs.
Figure d: Weighting the references changes older posts' values.
The idea of the weighted references is to determine how much the new posts
affect the older posts with their review. If you give a high weight, close to J‘‘%, then
the reference will affect it more than a low weight, closer to ‘%. A positive weight
suggests that the referenced post deserves to increase in value. A negative weight
suggests the older post should diminish in value—it is not contributing value to the
DAO.
Figure c: Weighted references cascade value to older posts, increasing or decreas-
ing their value. This enables review of past behavior, rewarding long-term contribu-
tions and guarding the DAO against gaming.
Simple arithmetic will change the value of the older posts. The changes cascade
through the WDAG of posts in the forum, readjusting the value of all connected con-
tributions, continually improving previous judgments.
There are many choices that need to be made for exactly how the cascade works.
How many levels deep do the references affect the value of posts? The deeper the
calculations go, the more history is relevant. How much do the new posts share their
value with old posts? More value-sharing with older posts will promote long-term con-
tributions and innovations and increases stability; less value-sharing encourages new
contributions and immediate work. How you design the calculation tells us whether
you give more value to long-term or short-term contributions. Deeper graph theory
analysis allows us to optimize design choices to incentivize behaviors which lead to
the goals which further the DAO’s particular values.
Hard protocols stipulate how the algorithm automatically calculates the changes
to the value of the posts. Soft protocols stipulate how the DAO requires the posters
to behave. An example of a soft protocol is the requirement that whenever a poster
discusses a new topic within a category, like local politics, they must reference the
previous protocols posted which set up the DAO’s rules for discussing the politics of
how to spend taxes—say ‘.J%. This enables the DAO to reward older contributions,
from the time when the DAO was initially being developed and not yet attracting
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

16 (cid:0) Chapter ) - Historiography
money. If a new post doesn’t reference older posts properly, according to the proto-
cols that have been established by the DAO, then the UI of each user can follow the
soft protocols and automatically punish the poster with downvotes. Again, the gov-
ernance design, in this case the parameter choices, reflect the values of the DAO.
In summary, reviewing through references enables punishment and rewards in
DAOs which changes the motivations of members from a focus on immediate rewards
to the future, encouraging delayed gratification and sacrifice for the good of the
group. Review changes the game theoretical perspective from a single stage game, to
a repeated game. This leads to more efficient cooperation instead of internal compe-
tition. This makes business sense for how the open source environment, essential to
the decentralized economy, can be sustained in the long run. Review helps create a
decentralized history for a DAO, which gives them momentum. History gives meaning
and focus to our perceptions. History is the basis for making governance (steering)
more effective. It allows members to judge whether they are properly promoting their
unifying transcendental values. History brings clarity and stability.
To keep a decentralized organization stable in the long run, they need this mo-
mentum gained from a clear history. But momentum toward what purpose? If the
system is not moving toward a healthy and productive goal, it will not last long. The
most important aspect of a decentralized organization, the feature that ultimately de-
termines its long-term success, is the group’s set of transcendental values.
Bibliography
Formating example:
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782217

