Draft Version 0.2
Secure Proof of Stake Protocol
Craig Calcaterra & Wulf Kaal
Abstract
The Secure Proof of Stake protocol (SPoS) uses reputation-verification to solve the centralization,
efficiency, and security problems that afflict existing blockchain consensus protocols. At heart, a
secure proof of stake protocol follows naturally from a secure decentralized autonomous system
for validating the reputation of anonymous users. SPoS has several advantageous features over
previous PoS protocols. SPoS enables on-chain governance to decide issues such as standards for
block creation, policing, and scaling. All protocol upgrades are handled swiftly, decisively, openly,
and stably, through the weighted democracy of reputation-staked decision making. Because nodes
no longer hash mine but rather check the validity of blocks and vote, SPoS is more efficient than
proof-of-work consensus. This paper explains the SPoS protocol and how it maintains
decentralization, efficiency, liveness, swift finality, and anonymity, while addressing the security
issues of Byzantine faults, the various 51% attacks, stake grinding, the tragedy of the commons,
DoS attacks, censorship, liveness faults, Sybil attacks, tyranny of the majority, and soft protocol
upgrades.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 Overview 2
2 PoS challenges 5
2.1 Hard theoretical limits 5
2.2 Soft attacks 6
3 The Reputation Verification Platform 10
4 SPoS generalities 14
5 SPoS specifics 14
5.1 Block producers 15
5.2 Block production 15
6 Analysis 20
7 Summary and Conclusion 28
Appendix: calculations 28
A.1 The price to purchase 51% of the sem tokens 28
A.2 Natural sem token inflation 32
References 33
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

1 Overview
A fundamental and perpetual debate in the crypto community attempts to discern the most efficient
and secure consensus protocol for block production on blockchains. The core debate centers
around proof of work (PoW) versus proof of stake (PoS). The goal of any PoS scheme is to
eliminate the expensive hash mining step in PoW, used to cryptographically secure data in a
blockchain. Eliminating PoW can improve decentralization, vastly improve energy efficiency, and
allow a greater rate of transaction processing. The difficulty is finding a PoS protocol that is at
least as secure as PoW. The greater ambition is to find a PoS protocol that is far more secure than
PoW in order to improve scalability, e.g., by allowing trustworthy sharding.
Several impossibility proofs in distributed computing make this goal seem daunting. In fact it is
obvious there can be no single, fixed, entirely algorithmic policing solution which completely
prevents independent nodes in a distributed system from gaming the system by producing blocks
with transactions that advantage some parties over others1. As factors change, such as markets
forces and network performance, new opportunities arise for parties to profit at the expense of the
majority, e.g., by censoring transactions. Therefore a successful PoS protocol must be flexible
enough to continually police new attack strategies. A secure PoS protocol requires a proper
incentive structure which perpetually motivates users to produce valuable blocks, to police the
production of blocks which violate protocols, and to improve block production protocols in
response to gaming.
To create a successful system with proper motivations, we must widen our scope and consider the
circular relationships between 1) the block producers and validators, 2) the blockchain and its
production protocols, and 3) the off-platform users who inject the fees which drive the system.
Under the platform, these three branches are called 1) the bench, 2) the forum, and 3) the public.
The platform uses balanced incentives between these three branches to create a positive feedback
loop which incentivizes beneficial contributions from all members.
1 Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem (https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/arrows-theorem/ retrieved January 23rd, 2018)
from social choice theory is the simplest expression of the inherent theoretical limitation of engineered hard protocols
for solving distributed decision-making problems. It is intuitively clear there will always exist a need for nodes to
collaborate via soft forks to improve protocols.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

This paper details a PoS blockchain consensus protocol which uses a reputation verification
platform2 to ensure block production is honest3, economically viable, scalable, and secure. We call
this protocol Secure Proof of Stake (SPoS) to distinguish it from the several previous PoS
protocols.
Since SPoS relies on the user reputation created by the reputation verification platform, before
readers can understand and trust the SPoS protocol, readers must understand and trust that the
platform is secure against the host of problems that have plagued all previous attempts to create
meaningful reputation for potentially pseudonymous users, including powerful centralized
commercial platforms such as Ebay and Amazon which rely on buyer and seller reputation.
Though we review the generalities here, a prerequisite to understanding SPoS is to read and
understand the platform parameters explaining the architecture.4
Given a secure reputational system, the stakes in SPoS are given by the reputation tokens (called
sem tokens), then the protocols follow naturally. Other PoS protocols regularly use ad hoc
solutions to solve problems as they are identified, such as the long-range attack, cartel formation,
and censorship resistance. These problems are automatically handled in a self-policing reputational
system.
Therefore the SPoS architecture has several advantageous features over the other PoS protocols.
First, SPoS is more secure because it has a different reward structure, which ensures the
motivations of users is to maintain protocols that attract the maximum use and to honestly produce
blocks following those protocols. In particular, the stakes (sem tokens) are naturally far less
fungible than cryptocurrency stakes, so long-term probity is incentivized, eliminating many short-
term arbitrage opportunities. The reward structure involves the following:
1. All fees gained by block creation are shared with the entire group according to a reputation-
weighted salary. Therefore, unlike every other implemented platform, there is no direct
monetary reward incentive for creating mining pools or block production cartels, which are
a threat to decentralization which increases the likelihood of 51% attacks. These reputation-
weighted salaries encourage actions that benefit the platform long term and guard against
2 Calcaterra, Craig and Kaal, Wulf A. and Andrei, Vlad, Blockchain Infrastructure for Measuring Domain Specific
Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and Anonymous Systems (February 18, 2018). U of St. Thomas (Minnesota)
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-11. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3125822
3 Honest production of blocks means producers faithfully follow the protocols the community deems most beneficial.
A benefit is defined to be a verifiable step toward achieving the goals of the community--usually this means profit,
but blockchains can be run to organize groups in the service of any goal.
4 Calcaterra, Craig and Kaal, Wulf A. and Andrei, Vlad, Blockchain Infrastructure for Measuring Domain Specific
Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and Anonymous Systems (February 18, 2018). U of St. Thomas (Minnesota)
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-11. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3125822
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

short term arbitrage opportunities which harm the reputation of the blockchain.
2. All positive contributions to the platform are directly rewarded with sem tokens, not
currency. All negative actions (determined by votes from the community) are punished
with loss of sem tokens (slashing). Policing is swift and effective through reputation staked
bets in the validation pool. Since the value of a sem token derives from the regular
reputation-weighted salary, which is split amongst all users, long-term platform
improvement is incentivized. Sem tokens are less fungible than the currency received in
salary, which prevents short term arbitrage attacks.
3. Anyone can gain new sem tokens at any time and join in the process of block creation and
share the rewards, which encourages maximum decentralization.
The opportunity to purchase sem tokens may appear to open the platform to an obvious
51% attack. However, whenever someone sends a fee to the platform to gain sem tokens,
at least half of the tokens minted are shared with the community who polices the
application. We provide a mathematical proof that shows this alone completely eliminates
all incentives to perform the 51% attack in Appendix A.1. Further, other protocols are
naturally incorporated that safeguard this threat, such as requiring new nodes to prove their
worth in various ways.
4. Users who produce valid blocks and who are knowledgeable enough to decide on protocol
improvements will enjoy substantially greater rewards. Users who don’t will be punished
with loss of sem tokens. Inactive users (liveness faults) are indirectly punished with the
natural inflation of the token, which happens because new tokens are minted whenever the
platform attracts a fee. Therefore, the system will naturally and stably tend toward probity.
5. The forum holds evidence of positive contributions to the blockchain, including evidence
of proper block production, policing block production, protocol suggestions, and
discussion. Every post is subjected to a validation pool where all sem token holders have
the opportunity to stake their tokens to decide the value of a contribution. The staking of
tokens, with its potential for slashing, is necessary to avoid the tragedy of the commons. A
reference system allows new validated posts to alter the value of sem tokens minted from
older posts. This opportunity for review adds stability against slashing, giving users the
ability to police long-term systemic attacks, the ability to reverse previous decisions, and
the ability to reward long-term improvements such as protocol upgrades.
Secondly, SPoS is evolutionary in nature. It’s architecture naturally incorporates a mechanism for
1) proposing, deciding, and rewarding authors of protocol improvements, and 2) policing any
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

gaming during block production. The forum holds a history of all protocol improvement
suggestions, the validation pool specifies the consensus of the community on each issue, and the
reference system allows retroactive rewarding of proposers and testers who contributed to the
security and success of the blockchain.
In the next section we review the major challenges to creating any PoS protocol. In Section 3, we
review the platform which is needed to detail the SPoS protocol, presented in Section 4. Finally,
we analyze the SPoS protocol in Section 5, explaining how it solves the problems detailed in
Section 2. The primary concern is achieving consensus on block finality, while maintaining
liveness, decentralization, autonomy, anonymity, efficiency, and especially security--which
includes Byzantine faults, 51% attacks, stake grinding, the nothing-at-stake problem (tragedy of
the commons), Sybil attacks, tyranny of the majority, liveness faults, DoS attacks, perverse
delegates, censorship, and soft protocol changes.
2 PoS challenges
In this section we review the major challenges to any PoS protocol, in order to explain how the
SPoS addresses each of them (See Section 6). Valuable resources for a more exhaustive
introduction which are still aimed at a general technical audience is the Ethereum foundation’s
PoS summary5 and the Bitcoin Wiki page6. Readers familiar with PoS research may wish to skip
to Section 3 and Section 4 where the platform and the SPoS protocols are detailed.
2.1 Hard theoretical limits
To begin, there are three basic theoretical boundaries from computer science to consider when
choosing block production protocols:
1) The 33% BFT threshold7: If more than ⅓ of participants are maliciously colluding, honest
users cannot immediately establish consensus with certainty8.
5 Vitalik Buterin, et al., “Proof of Stake FAQ”, edited October 30, 2017,
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Proof-of-Stake-FAQ retrieved December 10, 2017.
6 https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Proof_of_Stake retrieved December 10, 2017.
7 The general idea is as follows: If there are 34% Byzantine nodes colluding, and in the worst case scenario the other
66% of nodes are perfectly partitioned into two separate sets of the network with 33% each, then the 34% Byzantine
nodes can publish conflicting information to the two subsets of the network and dominate both. For a more detailed
analysis see
Gabriel Bracha, “Asynchronous Byzantine agreement protocols”, Information and Computation, Volume 75, Issue
2, November 1987, pp. 130-143.
8 Consensus is the state where different nodes agree on a given transaction’s origin, timing, and validity.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

2) The FLP impossibility theorem9: It is impossible to simultaneously achieve complete
availability10 and security in an asynchronous network.
3) The CAP theorem11: It is impossible for a distributed data store to simultaneously
guarantee complete consistency, availability, and partition tolerance12.
Given the inevitable possibility of Byzantine faults in a distributed system, such results require
any protocol to hedge, promising only a probability of finality and security inversely proportional
to liveness and speed.
The SPoS protocol, recognizing the changing realities of history and society, doesn’t permanently
choose which qualities are most important to stress. SPoS gives users the freedom and power to
choose which quality is important to safeguard, depending on the changing environment, as the
blockchain progresses and contemporary threats are identified.
The initial SPoS protocols stress security and honest block production. Once stability is achieved
with a large enough user base which has proven itself honest by earning valuable reputation with
positive contributions, more availability can be achieved with more confidence--this is the
bootstrapping problem relevant to any distributed system. Then long-term stability in the honesty
of the system is maintained by slashing from the validation pool.
One final theoretical obstacle is the general impossibility of creating a fixed protocol which will
always reflect the will of its creators. Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem from social choice theory is
the simplest expression of this limitation.
2.2 Soft attacks
Beyond the above theoretical limits, there are several attacks and degeneracy dangers to keep in
mind when choosing block production protocols that we detail below: 1) centralization, 2) lack of
anonymity/DoS attacks, 3) valuable transactions, 4) the nothing-at-stake problem (tragedy of the
commons), 5) “Spirit of the law” soft protocol violations, 6) liveness faults, 7) 51% attacks, 8)
long range attacks, 9) perverse delegates, 10) Sybil attacks, 11) tyranny of the majority, 12) stake
grinding, 12) censorship, 13) the 𝑃+𝜖 attack, 14) soft protocol changes, and 15) the altruism cliff.
1) Centralization is an existential threat to distributed systems. This threat arises in all
previous blockchains. Under bitcoin’s PoW, centralization occurs mainly due to economy
of scale issues. E.g., building an ASIC farm of 1000 CPUs is far cheaper than 1000 people
9 Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, & Michael S. Paterson, “Impossibility of Distributed Consensus with One
Faulty Process”, Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, Volume 32, Number 2, April 1985, pp. 374-
382. Available Online https://groups.csail.mit.edu/tds/papers/Lynch/jacm85.pdf retrieved December 10, 2017.
10 Availability (closely related to liveness) in this context describes the state in which the system is responsive to
transactions. If a system spends a long time deciding on the validity of a transaction, then the system can reach greater
confidence in consensus and therefore greater security, but it comes at the expense of being off-line to new transactions
while deciding.
11 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem
12 A network is said to be partitioned if it has isolated subnets which cannot communicate and share information about
their states. Partition tolerance is a measure of how quickly consensus can be achieved given partial, temporary
partitioning.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

buying 1 CPU each. The second problem with PoW happens when lotteries do not have
time to thoroughly sample the users. Even if the the algorithm is fair, a user with a tiny
fraction of the computing power of the system is running the risk of never winning a hash
race, so they can gain financial security by joining a mining pool.
Under most any PoS system, the economy of scale advantage is mitigated because doubling
your computing power does not double your power to build blocks. However, block
production cartels may still arise due to lotteries, or the fact that voting delegations are built
into the system, or the fact that the stakes needed to be a block producer may be bought, so
there is an incentive to control the blockchain.
Another type of centralization is common in PoS systems. If the blockchain goes offline
for a long period, or if too few nodes are active, can the blockchain restart or regenerate
autonomously13? Or is there a need for social coordination between the nodes? If so,
anonymity is threatened and famous nodes are required.
Similarly, a final type of centralization occurs if the blockchain lacks on-chain autonomy.
The question is, how is node consensus achieved for protocol upgrades/forks such as
deciding how and when to scale or shard to handle more transactions, or how to improve
standards for block creation and policing? Again, if famous people or powerful consortia
are needed to lead development and drive the debate, decentralization is not truly achieved,
and this leads to the security risks blockchains were supposed to mitigate compared with
centralized organizations.
2) Lack of Anonymity/DoS attacks. A second existential threat to a PoS blockchain is the
danger that block producers will need to use their identity in order to convince nodes to
choose them to produce a block. This is particularly evident in DPoS, where delegates must
win popularity contests to become producers. If block producers’ identities are revealed,
the supranational independence of the blockchain is threatened as is its security. In this
case local jurisdictions could exert legal power over block production, which will weaken
confidence in its fairness.
Secondly, DoS attacks can be performed on stable block producers (especially delegates)
whose identities or locations are revealed.
3) Valuable transactions. No protocol can guard against Byzantine faults if a transaction is
more valuable than the promise of all future fees for the entire platform; in this case a party
could bribe the entire set of nodes (or 51%) to destroy their own blockchain’s integrity.
Therefore an obvious assumption is that the sum of all fees should not be smaller than the
value of any individual transaction. The idea is that there are a great number of global
transactions, so only a tiny fraction of the value of each transaction is required to maintain
13 This definition is attributed to Matthew Wampler-Doty as reported in
Vlad Zamfir, “The History of Casper, Chapter 5” Medium, December 30th, 2016 (Online)
https://medium.com/@Vlad_Zamfir/the-history-of-casper-chapter-5-8652959cef58 retrieved December 10, 2017.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

security. Fees are crucial at some point, since we cannot rely on altruism in a decentralized,
anonymous system in our selfish world. Therefore it seems necessary for there to exist
several blockchains with different fee structures to guarantee different security for different
values of transactions.
4) The nothing at stake problem. More generally, the tragedy of the commons happens
when a protocol does not properly reward positive contributions or punish damaging
behaviors (slashing14).
5) “Spirit of the law” soft protocol violations. Any protocol can be gamed to benefit a
minority group at the expense of the whole (cf. Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem).
6) Liveness faults15. When some users don’t participate in block creation or validation, then
security is weakened and decentralization is threatened.
7) 51% attacks. In the various 51% attacks, a group that owns a significant percentage of the
governing tokens can profit at the expense of the platform and the other users by exerting
their power. The 51% attack is particularly dangerous in decentralized systems with
potentially anonymous users and automated protocols because there is usually no recourse
to petition a centralized authority with the power to effectuate dispute resolution. Therefore
if there is an arbitrage opportunity due to any weakness in the system, someone in the world
will certainly exploit it eventually.
One type of 51% attack is the arbitrage scenario where a group will buy 51% of the tokens,
make a short term profit at the expense of other users (double spending, editing, or
censoring, e.g.) then quickly sell off the tokens before the platform’s value declines from
the damage done.
Almost all other blockchains sell off a significant number of their tokens in an initial token
sale, or mine them, or a combination of both. Either way, these tokens are almost always
perfectly fungible currencies, so there is a clear answer to how much it would cost to
corrupt or destroy blockchain running a PoS protocol based on cryptocurrency stakes.
8) The long-range attack is a fundamental problem PoS protocols must address, where a
malicious producer may create a long list of blocks forked from an earlier valid block,
because there is no PoW energetic outlay required to prevent this16. Essentially, a new node
14 Vitalik Buterin, “Slasher: A Punitive Proof-of-Stake Algorithm”, Ethereum Blog, January 15th, 2014 (Online)
https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/01/15/slasher-a-punitive-proof-of-stake-algorithm/ retrieved December 10, 2017.
15 Vitalik Buterin & Virgil Griffith, “Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation, November 15th,
2017. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.09437.pdf retrieved December 10, 2017
and
Vitalik Buterin, “Incentives in Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation, August 27th, 2017.
https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/casper-economics/casper_economics_basic.pdf
16 See Andrew Poelstra, “On Stake and Consensus”, March 2015, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://download.wpsoftware.net/bitcoin/pos.pdf for a cogent criticism of many PoS protocols.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

can join the network and see the genuine chain and a fabricated chain that is longer; then
the new node, lacking the proof of work hashes, could not objectively distinguish which is
correct. Casper17 and Tendermint18 solve this problem with a system of token locking.
9) Perverse delegates. In any PoS, especially DPoS, the motives of the producers are more
likely to be avaricious than average, because those with perverse motives are more likely
to make the effort to produce blocks and risk slashing. The ability to achieve clear
consensus on validation protocols in the forum makes it easy to police adverse actions
without the need for any extra incentive besides preserving the value of your sem token
holdings.
10) Sybil attacks are prevented with weighted voting, because all actions on the platform are
fairly evaluated as determined by holdings of openly verified reputation; thus power is not
increased by distributing it amongst cloned accounts.
11) Tyranny of the majority is inhibited since all actions are reviewed by users weighted by
sem tokens, so direct democracy does not dilute expertise.
12) Stake grinding. In any decentralized PoS protocol there needs to be an automated
mechanism for determining when and who produces a block. Generally it is a given that in
a decentralized system, the selection should be random, weighted according to the
producers’ stakeholdings. The randomness must be achieved with a pseudo-random
number generator whose algorithm and seed must be available for verification by all nodes.
If the protocol is not carefully chosen, this introduces an attack vector, called stake
grinding, in which malicious producers might manipulate the seed in order to influence the
selection in their favor.
13) Censorship. A block producer may choose to violate protocol and run an edited block
production program which picks and chooses which transactions to include in their blocks.
Such censorship would open the possibility of personally profiting at the expense of the
integrity of the system. In a distributed system--which cannot achieve constant perfect
communication between nodes--we can never certainly determine that a block producer
was censoring certain transactions, instead of simply not being aware of them.
Censorship can be good or bad for the platform. Good censorship includes preventing
transactions which destroy the larger reputation of the platform, such as selling child
pornography or chemical weapons. Bad censorship is more subtle, such as preventing
competing organizations from registering transactions.
17 Vitalik Buterin & Virgil Griffith, “Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation, November, 15,
2017. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.09437.pdf retrieved December 10, 2017.
18 Jae Kwon, “Tendermint: Consensus without mining“, 2014, (Online) retrieved December 10, 2017
https://tendermint.com/static/docs/tendermint.pdf
Chjango Unchained, “Consensus Compare: Casper vs. Tendermint”, Cosmos, November 16th, 2017, (Online)
Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://blog.cosmos.network/consensus-compare-casper-vs-tendermint-6df154ad56ae
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

14) The 𝑷+𝝐 attack. See [Buterin 2015].19
15) Soft protocol changes. There will alway be changes in market forces, network
performance, computing technology, cryptographic standards, social values, and the goals
of any particular blockchain. Therefore there will always be the need to change block
production and validation protocols. Therefore, in addition to the fundamental fact that no
protocol is perfectly secure, there will always be the threat that the nodes will accept a
deeply flawed protocol that can destroy a blockchain. If the protocol does not involve a
decentralized medium for cheap and available communication that is eternally open to
review, then the risks from centralization compound the danger.
The means by which all current major blockchains achieve their soft forks is through
private communication between famous token-holding whales. This results in a state of
governance which is completely counter to the blockchain design goals of decentralization,
anonymity, and autonomy. Any blockchain subject to such governance is ultimately less
secure than legacy centralized systems which pointedly address centralized security risks.
16) The altruism cliff. An important problem with PoS experiments is that the nascent space
is currently dominated by altruists. In many areas of the economy it is understood that the
majority of people who choose to work in the area do so for motives aside from monetary
profit, such as nurses, teachers, and police. This is also generally true of any population
involved in any emerging industry, since they need the larger industry to succeed in order
to profit, and it is evidently true for the currently emerging crypto economy. People are
investing themselves in the hope that the industry will succeed, so they tend to work for
the greater good.
However, once the crypto economy is mature, we cannot assume users will continue to
behave altruistically. We can anticipate, with certainty, an influx of hedgers and rent
seekers who will quite naturally exploit any weakness in the system for profit.
Therefore we cannot use any successful experiments at this time to infer protocols are truly
secure. We must rely on sound reasoning in order to obtain any confidence that our projects
will continue to succeed.
3 The Reputation Verification Platform
The reputation verification platform is a decentralized application on the blockchain which vests
users with verified reputation. The platform is resistant to Sybil attacks, tyranny of the majority,
and 51% attacks. The platoform achieves this through a process which creates a positive feedback
loop between on-platform token holders (the experts) and off-platform users (the public) mediated
19 Vitalik Buterin, “The P + epsilon Attack”, Ethereum Blog, January 28th, 2015 (Online)
https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/01/28/p-epsilon-attack/ retrieved January 23rd, 2018.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

by evidence posted to the blockchain and judged in a validation pool, driven by balanced
incentives.
The system is extremely general and can be used to organize users towards many goals. However,
the most viable use cases will be in decentralized organizations (such as DAOs) where members
have a specific common goal. It will be especially useful in distributed organizations which work
largely autonomously, such as PoS blockchains or IoT consensus. In this case the primary goal is
to guarantee all nodes are following a previously agreed upon algorithmic protocol.
Here we give an inductive argument for how to build a decentralized reputational system for
distributing and valuating sem tokens which is secure against Sybil attacks, the tyranny of the
majority, and 51% attacks.
a) Forum. Evidence of all work which creates sem tokens must be posted to the
blockchain for eternal review. Similar to distributed digital currency creation, every
sem token needs an openly verifiable history.
b) Reputation-weighted salary. All fees should be shared with the entire group of
sem token holders (the bench of experts) relative to their token holdings. This
ensures all experts are motivated to police each individual sem-staked action, to
protect the value of their investment.
c) Validation pool. In a decentralized environment consisting of potentially
anonymous actors, the only fair way to assign power is to allow all users to judge
the value of contributions democratically. To avoid the tragedy of the commons
(nothing-at-stake) problem, staking reputation is necessary and sem tokens will be
won or lost based on whether the user judges with the majority--experts who police
an action by voting will be rewarded. Experts who fail to participate (liveness fault)
will be stably punished because the system is inflationary: if they don’t participate
they will not gain any portion of the newly minted sem tokens, so their own unused
sem token holdings will represent a smaller percentage of the total, so they will
receive a smaller percentage of future reputation-weighted salaries. To avoid Sybil
attacks and tyranny of the majority each user is capable of staking any portion of
their sem token holdings, creating a proportional democratic governance process.
d) Foundational token value. All new sem tokens are minted in proportion to fees.
This assures the tokens have a foundational meaning and insures users will act in
the interests of public users in order to attract those fees and avoid the tragedy of
the commons.
e) Balance. All new sem tokens are staked 50/50 in a validation pool, for and against
a post. This insures that all actions can be fairly judged by existing token holders,
who will not be swayed by an unbalanced validation pool from a new large fee.
The active expert who performed the work which attracted the public fee is not paid
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

directly; instead the fee is split in the reputation-weighted salary. The direct reward
for the evidence-of-work poster is that the 50% of the newly minted tokens are
staked as an upvote in the validation pool in the active expert’s name. This prevents
many short term arbitrage opportunities.
f) Review. Each new post has the opportunity to reference older posts. If the new post
is validated, the reference will change the relative value of sem tokens created in
the graph of connected posts. Thus previous posts’ value can change depending on
how important future users perceive the precedent for the system. This gives experts
the ability to review past actions, allowing a more careful analysis of patterns of
behavior, encouraging actions which make lasting contributions (such as protocol
development) and punishing actions which are judged to harm the long term health
of the platform. This reference system imbues the forum with the mathematical
structure of a citation graph, or equivalently, a weighted directed acyclic graph
(WDAG). There are many options for how to weight the references, and for how
those weights revalue the tokens created with each post relative to the post’s
position in the WDAG. These options will be chosen according the the goals and
values of each particular DAO.
g) Stability. Honest members with genuine expertise should have extreme confidence
that their stakes in the validation pool will never be slashed unfairly. Honesty means
faithfully following the protocols established in the forum. A healthy expertise will
continually have near-unanimous consensus on every evidence-of-work validation
pool. This creates an impediment to development. Any DAO will require continual
evolution in their protocols and policies to combat internal and external attacks and
degeneracies. To encourage careful deliberation in all governance decisions,
experts must have access to all relevant information and consider contrary points
of view. Therefore authors should label their development posts “contentious”.
Then contentious validation pools on contentious posts will allow expert members
to stake their tokens to register their opinion without the risk of losing their tokens,
for the low cost of DoS-prevention fees which will go to the winners. Once
significant consensus is reached in a debate, a contentious post becomes accepted
protocol.
Finally when a persistent minority opinion arises, the platform should provide predictable
opportunities for peaceful forks, where users can vote to split their tokens into separate domains
of power.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

Specific details for how to run the validation pool and token creation, including how new users
enter the system, and how to weight the forum DAG with references, are supplied in the underlhing
platform paper20.
The forum and the validation pool distribute tokens to a group of users which we call the bench
of experts. The bench, the forum, and the validation pool form an evolutionary ecosystem which
is driven by off-platform public fees to efficiently cooperate and find consensus in the pursuit of
the goals of whatever organization chooses to use the platform for governance. Independent tokens
are created for each organization. The balanced and fairly validated allotment of sem tokens
proportional to public fees, the fair distribution of fees according to sem token holdings, and the
fair revaluation of sem tokens through the possibility of validated references, creates a positive
feedback loop between the bench and the public which incentivizes experts to continually police
and improve the forum.
Experts from the bench stake their sem tokens to 1) write evidence of work posts (including
suggestions for protocol changes), 2) evaluate posts with upvotes or downvotes, and 3) announce
their availability for working public smart contracts by posting stakes of their sem token holdings.
The forum evolves to include information on 1) proper smart contracting language for the public
to use to engage experts, including appropriate fees and protocols for work, 2) policies for the
future development of the expertise, and 3) reputation-verified evidence of expertise through posts
of successful work. The validation pool intermediates between the bench and the forum to vest
experts with bet-verified sem tokens, which are valuable as power to influence the development
of the expertise DAG and valuable in gaining future reputation-weighted salaries.
The general function of the platform is to drive consensus between independent users who wish to
collaborate toward a common goal, as in a DAO. A well-functioning application of the platform
should expect that most every validation pool will have overwhelming consensus (think > 99%
upvotes). In most cases this should be achieved automatically as every honest member will be
running validated algorithms developed and posted in the forum in order to police the behavior of
the organization.
An important feature of the platform is that it is completely decentralized. There are no overarching
tokens that control the platform smart contract--it runs entirely on the DoS service fees of whatever
host blockchain is used (e.g., gas on Ethereum). The platform generates internal tokens when fees
are sent to it--tokens for subdomains of the forum called expertises. All fees are immediately
distributed to the users, and not collected by the platform or the creators. Anyone can create an
20 Calcaterra, Craig and Kaal, Wulf A. and Andrei, Vlad, Blockchain Infrastructure for Measuring Domain Specific
Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and Anonymous Systems (February 18, 2018). U of St. Thomas (Minnesota)
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-11. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3125822
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

expertise and a unique new type of sem token, again using only the DoS service fees of whatever
host blockchain is used. Then this creator has complete control over the expertise, until they share
control with other users they deem fit for collaboration. Anyone else is free to create a competing
expertise. This complete decentralization is crucial for ensuring security in a distributed
reputational system.
4 SPoS generalities
SPoS uses the platform to vest users who contribute to the success of the blockchain with sem
tokens. All sem token holders share all fees the blockchain attracts (typically transaction fees).
Contributing to the success of the blockchain includes following the protocols developed in the
forum for block production and policing, and suggesting protocol improvements. Block production
and policing will generally consist of running a full node with the currently approved algorithm
from the forum.
This general approach has the following consequences:
1) Protocols for block creation are automated and openly viewable on the blockchain.
2) The platform allows automated analysis of blocks, with both immediate policing through
the validation pool and long-term policing via the referencing system of the WDAG.
3) The evolutionary environment of continual posts in the forum judged in the validation pool
encourages stable consensus on continual protocol improvements, which ensures security.
4) The WDAG incentivizes protocol improvements since it allows retroactive rewards
through references.
5) Many types of blockchains can be created with this protocol. Depending on the goals for
the blockchain (cryptocurrency blockchains, smart contract blockchains, IoT blockchains,
etc.), different fee structures will be appropriate.
5 SPoS specifics
The SPoS protocol will continually evolve in the forum. Therefore anything we claim now is
provisional, since the platform is completely autonomous and the authors will have no control over
its evolution. We can only specify here how the protocol will begin.
SPoS has elements of DPoS and chain-based PoS, as time slots are regular, and block producers
are chosen randomly based on stake holdings. SPoS also has BFT21-style PoS elements since all
blocks are evaluated through the platform’s validation pool.
21 BFT stands for Byzantine fault tolerance, which refers to security against dishonest producers in a decentralized
system. See https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Proof-of-Stake-FAQ for general PoS terminology.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

As we explain the protocol below, keep in mind that all steps are automated and performed by
computers, except (perhaps) the protocol proposals which are posted in the forum.
5.1 Block producers
Blocks are produced by SPoS experts, i.e., users who hold sem tokens in the SPoS expertise tag in
the platform. Someone who produces a block is called a producer.
To become an SPoS expert, a user gains SPoS sem tokens by sending any fee to the system. As
detailed in the platform paper,22 this starts a validation pool in which the user is vested with sem
tokens proportional to the fee they sent if the bench experts vote in favor of the application. In the
beginning of the SPoS expertise tag, the protocol will allow anyone to win their validation pool,
without review.
As proven in Appendix A.1, validating all applications without review is quite secure against
currently foreseeable attacks, even without the extra natural protection the validation pool could
afford. However, protocols for acceptance will certainly evolve in the forum, possibly including
such precautions as giving upper and lower bounds for fees, and potentially requiring some form
of outside reputation proportional to the fee to be tied to the account which can be slashed in case
of proof of malfeasance.
5.2 Block production
Protocols for valid block production continually evolve in the SPoS forum. Initially they will
include the following:
1) Random selection of block producers according to availability stakes23. Each SPoS
expert who wishes to be included in the random selection of the next block producer will
submit availability stakes. Availability stakes are sem tokens an expert chooses to
encumber in a standardized smart contract which is sent to the platform to signal their
availability to produce blocks. The platform has a list of all potential producers with their
availability stakes, and uses the list to randomly select the next producer, weighted
according to stakes. When an expert is selected, part of their availability stakes are used to
22 Calcaterra, Craig and Kaal, Wulf A. and Andrei, Vlad, Blockchain Infrastructure for Measuring Domain Specific
Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and Anonymous Systems (February 18, 2018). U of St. Thomas (Minnesota)
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-11. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3125822
23 Cf., follow-the-Satoshi in CoA PoS: Iddo Bentov, Ariel Gabizon, & Alex Mizrahi, “Cryptocurrencies without Proof
of Work”, 2014, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.5694
Whichever pseudo-random number generator is used must have an openly verifiable algorithm and seed in order to
achieve consensus in this distributed system. Therefore we must guard against the possibility that a block producer
will produce a block in such a way that they exert influence over the selection of future producers (this attack is called
stake grinding, discussed above). E.g., if the protocol uses the time a block is deployed as the seed to select a future
block, then a producer with a fast enough computer can calculate the correct time beforehand which will result in a
favorable outcome.
The seed platform uses is a hash of the joined symmetric keys that were submitted by all validators during the vote
revealing process (see the platform paper) during the validation step in 4) below. The order of the join is from smallest
to largest key. This protocol makes stake grinding impossible, even if only one validator is not colluding.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

pay for the opening of the validation pool for the block they produce, as described below.
2) Regular production schedule. Time slots for producing a block will occur every 𝑇 =
10seconds24. When a block producer is chosen according to the protocol in 1) they will be
assigned a window 𝑁 = 100 blocks25 later.
If block number 𝑥 is not produced during its scheduled time slot then it is empty, but its
scheduled producer’s availability stakes are still sent to the validation pool by the
availability stakes smart contract, to be judged by the SPoS bench. The bench may or may
not punish the errant producer for failing to produce a block by downvoting the empty
block, depending on the how the protocol established in the forum deals with the particular
circumstance. Initially there will be no penalty for missing a block, except the lost
opportunity to collect fees.
3) Block production. The expert selected in step 1) will produce a block and submit it to the
network in accordance with the protocols listed in the forum. This will include a Merkle
tree of all the network transactions the producer chooses to include in the block and a
pointer to a previous block.
The producer’s final action is to send the block’s address to her original availability stake
smart contract, which will send the block’s address, the producer’s address, and the
availability stake to the platform in order to initiate a validation pool, which places the
availability stakes as an upvote in the producer’s name.
4) Validation26. Each block will be reviewed by a validation pool, which will form part of
the consensus protocol (detailed in step 6, below). Along with the producer’s availability
stakes, the total fees included with all transactions contained in the block will be sent in
the block producer’s pseudonymous name to the platform with the block address posted to
24 All parameters stipulated in this paper are provisional and will be continually optimized in the forum, as alluded
before. In particular, this production schedule will depend on network latency.
Blockchains do not know what time it is in the human world. They require an oracle (a trusted source of information)
to add this information to the chain. The initial SPoS protocol for specifying the schedule is simply determined by
human time (GMT). Precision is determined afterward, by the bench through the validation pool. The validators check
if the block was published at the correct time. Thus incidentally, the SPoS blockchain is a clock oracle.
25 These two parameters depend on network synchrony/latency assumptions. The larger the parameters are, the less
synchrony is required for consensus.
A blockchain with a regular block production schedule opens the following theoretical threat to availability: A DoS
attack can be attempted where the known producer is prevented from submitting their block. This is not a serious
problem with SPoS. There are many more producers in SPoS than in other protocols, and there is no need for any
producer to identify themselves. The producer can send the transaction to the network from anywhere using public
key authentication (salted with the previous block’s address) to prove the block is valid. So assuming there is enough
time allotted in each window to submit a block more than once, producers can coordinate with an ally to surmount
any DoS attack, even if their identity is compromised.
Finally, if an ISP, government, corporation, any other entity does manage to shut down all the nodes within their
power or jurisdiction, any user outside of their power who submits availability stakes will be able to continue
production. Therefore SPoS satisfies freedom from deadlock.
26 The validation step delays liveness/availability in exchange for security against less than ⅓ Byzantine users.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

the forum. This triggers a validation pool where the SPoS experts will verify the block
production correctly, following the protocols agreed upon in the forum. In other words,
expert SPoS validators will download the most recent validation algorithm upvoted in the
forum. Faithfully running this algorithm on the block will automatically choose the correct
vote to win the validation pool, rewarding honest validators, assuming users with 51% of
sem token power act honestly. Honesty is defined as faithfully running the algorithm,
unedited.
Specifically, calling the platform to validate a block returns the following:
a) Sem tokens in proportion to the fees contained in the block are minted and staked
half in the block producers’ name as an upvote (this is the producer’s reward for
their work) and half as a downvote27.
b) The block producer’s availability stakes are staked as an additional upvote for the
producer.
c) SPoS experts may stake their sem tokens as up- or downvotes on the validity of the
producer’s block.
d) The voting window closes according to the parameter set by the bench in the forum.
The platform calculates the result of the vote28.
e) If the bench voted against the block, the producer loses her availability stakes
(slashing) to those who voted against her. If the bench voted for the block, the
producer receives the reward of half the newly minted sem tokens. Similarly any
expert who staked tokens for or against the validity of the block wins or loses tokens
in proportion to their stakes.
f) In the event the block is validated, the fees sent with the block are distributed in a
reputation-weighted salary to the entire bench. If the block is not validated, the fees
naturally remain with the transactions and will be picked up later when they are
validated in a successful block.
There are two obvious perverse incentives to discuss:
27 This opens the following hypothetical attack, which the reader should consider after digesting steps a) - f). The
attack is naturally prevented by the protocols. Suppose the producer adds their own transactions with large fees during
the producer’s block production window. In this case the fees are converted to sem tokens and staked half as upvotes
and half as downvotes. The goal of the attack is to shift the balance of sem tokens with these newly added tokens. If
the block is validated, the fees are disbursed to the entire active bench in the reputation-weighted salary, which is very
expensive for the attacker. But if the attacker produces an invalid block, then the fees will not be disbursed in the
salary, and the attacker can retract the high fee transaction before the next block picks up the transaction, and the
malicious producer does not lose their fees. So the attacker can mint new tokens at will for only the cost of the gas
fees. This attack only strengthens the platform.
The newly minted tokens will be split amongst those who policed the block according to proper protocol. This only
rewards those who properly followed protocol, and only punishes those who weren’t following protocol, or those who
were not active. Therefore, this attack merely accelerates the natural inflation of the sem token, which improves
security (see Section ***).
28 While the voting window is open, the votes are hidden. This is accomplished by users sending a symmetrically
encrypted vote, before the window closes, then sending the symmetric key after the vote finishes.
A hash of the join of the alphabetic ordering of these symmetric keys is the seed for the pseudo-random number
generator used for choosing the future producer.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

1) There is an incentive to validate a block to gain the fees sooner. This incentive is not
particularly strong, since these small fees will be picked up a few seconds later in the rare
occasion that a block is produced contrary to the automated protocols. So the incentive to
validate a flawed block is outweighed by the incentive to maintain the integrity and value
of the sem token by honestly following the protocols.
2) There is an incentive to invalidate a block in order to gain a share of the producer’s
availability stakes. This is simply not the correct perspective. Presumably, if the availability
stakes were not automatically encumbered the producer would have used them to upvote
the validation of the block anyway. So the little extra knowledge about the amount of
availability stakes given as upvotes should not affect the votes of the rest of the bench.
If the validation pool is given enough time (𝑡 → ∞) after a block is proposed, the block
enjoys complete finality since the community has enough time to come to perfect
consensus in evaluating whether the block was created according to stipulated protocols in
the forum. However, in practice, a long validation time will conflict with the practical need
for swift resolution. Since every step of validation is automated, validation pools will end
within seconds. By forcing validation pools to end in finite time, we open the possibility
of network partition and lack of genuine consensus which opens the possibility of forks,
which we discuss further below.
If a complete network outage precludes the possibility of a validation pool for block
𝑥(because the voting period expires before network connectivity is restored) then the
producer will win their availability stakes back, since ties go to the upvote, and the
randomly chosen producer will not be punished. However, if this happens the validators’
symmetric keys for the seed for the random selection of the producer of block 𝑥+𝑁 will
be missing. In this case the producer of block 𝑥+𝑁 will be randomly chosen using the
seed from the last block previous to 𝑥 whose validation pool did conclude, salted with the
block number. This ensures any network outage shorter than the history of the blockchain
will not eternally disrupt chain production. This addresses the availability/regeneracy
problem: even if the network loses all but one node, block production will continue (which
is also one definition of a decentralized system).
5) Pointers. Each valid block contains one pointer to an earlier, validated block.
Pointing to a block earlier than the block in the previous time slot creates a fork, which, if
continued, will invalidate the skipped blocks29, leaving all unused transactions contained
in the skipped blocks available for inclusion in future blocks. The fees that were previously
distributed to the bench from the skipped blocks will no longer have valid histories in those
skipped blocks, and so the fees’ ownership will automatically revert to the authors of the
transactions contained in the skipped blocks. This creates a disincentive for validating such
forks. Naturally, the protocol will automatically punish producers for skipping valid blocks
29 In this case these skipped blocks will not be part of the chain consensus discussed in point 6). Such blocks are called
orphans.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

by pointing to blocks too many time slots earlier (again, the specific protocol will be
stipulated in the forum and will depend on current network performance).
However, sometimes forking can be healthy, as for instance when correcting a Byzantine
fault as discussed in the next step.
6) Chain consensus, also known as the fork-choice rule, is determined by the chain with the
largest weight of valid blocks. Weight is measured by summing the upvotes minus the
downvotes30. Valid blocks have satisfied 1) through 5) above, i.e., they have valid
producers, valid timestamps, valid successful validation pool, and valid pointers. (In order
for this protocol to be consistent, it is assumed the contemporary validation algorithm in
the forum properly verifies the transactions have the proper history through their hashes).
Besides forking by pointing to a block earlier than the previous time slot, a second type of
fork is possible when a producer creates two or more blocks in their time slot--a Byzantine
fault called equivocation. If such an event is detected, both blocks will very likely be
rejected in both validation pools and the malicious producer will lose their availability
stakes to the validators who downvote the blocks. However, when the network is
partitioned it is possible a malicious producer might be capable of publishing blocks in the
appropriate subnets of the partition and winning each validation pool. In such an unlikely
scenario, the producer would be blacklisted31 soon after network connectivity is restored.
The next honest producer would point to a previous block and all Byzantine forks would
be invalidated. If there are 51% honest producers the Byzantine fork would eventually be
orphaned, since honest producers will outproduce the Byzantine producers and blacklist all
who reveal themselves with dishonest application of the agreed upon protocols.
Another protocol for preventing dishonest block production during network partition may
be developed in the forum: a 67% active validator requirement. This number addresses the
33% BFT threshold and is used in the Tendermint protocol. The idea is that the consensus
protocol would only recognize blocks which have been validated by at least 67% of the
active validators. An active validator is defined as a sem token holder who has participated
in any of the past 100 blocks. This prevents any BFT block from being created during
network partition, and greatly improves block finality32.
However, choosing this 67% active validator requirement as part of the protocol has a
downside. It arbitrarily punishes random producers with loss of their sem token rewards
30 This is essentially the GHOST protocol from Yonatan Sompolinsky & Aviv Zohar, “Secure High-Rate Transaction
Processing in Bitcoin (full version)”, Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2013. (Online) https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/881.pdf
retrieved December 10, 2017.
31 I.e., all the sem tokens used as availability stakes during their producer selection are burned. If a stronger punishment
is possible, it will certainly be developed in the forum.
32 Finality is the state where a block can confidently be considered to be permanently included in the chain. The idea
is that any honestly reporting node will agree. This is also referred to as persistence or stability or immutability or
safety in the literature.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

when the network is partitioned. More importantly, due to the CAP theorem33, it limits the
availability of the system, which is why it is not included in the initial implementation. The
platform naturally gives the bench the power to choose any parameter 0 ≤ 𝑝 ≤ 1 in place
of the 𝑝 = .67 active validator requirement, depending on network performance, by
adjusting the protocol in the forum.
7) Self-referential architecture. The platform can be run on one blockchain and validate
another. However, it is also possible to run the platform’s DApp, including its bench,
forum, and validation pool, on the very blockchain that is validated through the platform.
But this self-referential architecture destabilizes the system as it increases the likelihood of
forks. Once a validation pool concludes, the platform will send a transaction to the
blockchain which will be picked up in a future block, which itself needs to be validated by
a future validation pool, ad infinitum. With this wrinkle, how is consensus reached?
If the first block that included the validation pool’s transaction is not itself validated, that
transaction is not deleted, it will eventually be picked up by some other block, which itself
will eventually be validated, ad infinitum. So the ouroboros architecture destabilizes the
system, but not catastrophically for most imagined uses.
8) Forum contribution rewards. The entire bench shares all fees sent to the platform with
SPoS experts in reputation weighted salaries. Sem is earned through 4 avenues: 1) joining
the bench by sending a fee, 2) performing the work of block creation, 3) policing block
creation through the validation pools, and 4) contributions to the forum. The first 3 rewards
were discussed above. The fourth deserves some comments here.
Protocols for block creation and evaluation, and protocol development and evaluation will
continually evolve in the forum through contributions from experts in the SPoS tag.
Whenever a contribution is added as a post to the forum, the bench stakes sem tokens to
vote on it, and the winners are rewarded with the losers’ stakes. Each time a future post
references it, the author is further rewarded according to the algorithm described in the
platform paper.34
6 Analysis
The platform’s solutions for consensus protocols fall into 5 general categories: decentralization,
efficiency, autonomy, anonymity, and most importantly, security.
33 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAP_theorem
34 Calcaterra, Craig and Kaal, Wulf A. and Andrei, Vlad, Blockchain Infrastructure for Measuring Domain Specific
Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and Anonymous Systems (February 18, 2018). U of St. Thomas (Minnesota)
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-11. Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3125822
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

1. Decentralization. SPoS inhibits the centralization problem35 which arises in all previous
blockchains, whether they use bitcoin’s PoW or a flavor of PoS such as BitShare’s DPoS36
or Ethereum’s Casper.37 In each of these cases, mining pools or block production cartels
arise because lotteries, or voting delegations, or economy of scale38 give outsized rewards
to powerful groups.
Under most any PoS system, the economy of scale advantage is mitigated because doubling
your computing power does not double your power to build blocks.
SPoS solves the other decentralization threats, since there is only ever the incentive to be
part of one block production cartel, the platform itself, because all fees are distributed fairly
in a salary according to each user’s sem holdings39.
Further decentralization is achieved under SPoS because it is easy for anyone to become a
block producer and validator. This naturally encourages the widest possible distribution of
stakeholding. So SPoS doesn’t suffer from the tragedy of the commons problems other
mining protocols engender for 3 reasons. 1) Stakeholders are empowered to participate,
since every one of them gains more sem tokens by running the validation programs most
recently upvoted in the forum to police block creation. 2) Stakeholders are motivated to
improve the collective value of sem so that their salary is increased, which only happens
35 also called the monopoly problem
36 https://bitshares.org/technology/delegated-proof-of-stake-consensus/
37 Vitalik Buterin, “Incentives in Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation, August 27, 2017,
(Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/casper-
economics/casper_economics_basic.pdf
38 E.g., building an ASIC farm of 1000 CPUs is far cheaper than 1000 people buying 1 CPU each.
39 Multiple cartels cannot arise to attract fees, but might cartels arise where people want to join to get the extra sem
tokens generated by being randomly selected? Certainly. The deterrence to this is that the randomness of the selection
already does properly reward people proportionally to their holdings, if the speed of the selection of producers is
sufficient to correctly sample everyone. Therefore there should be a limit to how many producers participate relative
to the rate of block production.
In an ideal market (we say while witnessing speculation bubbles which obviously preclude perfection) this limit would
occur naturally. The number of people willing to invest money into the system would match the number of blocks
being sent in, meaning the people willing to do the work of validation and block creation would appropriately match
the fees the system attracts, and therefore the needs of the system would be perfectly met. The value of sem tokens
should only ever be reflective of their value for attracting fees from the reputation-weighted salary. Consequently, in
this imagined ideal market there would be no need to limit the acceptance of producers.
However, when the need arises, the bench can institute protocols for rejecting applicants through the validation pool.
Unfortunately this gives the incentive and opportunity for existing experts to completely block all new users, so the
existing bench members share all the fees. The mechanism that limits this is that the sem tokens are only as valuable
as the outside fees the blockchain attracts. If the blockchain loses confidence (due to centralization concerns, etc.) a
new one can be easily cloned to replace it which has a superior makeup. Then any DApps which run on the first SPoS
expertise can easily choose to switch to the competitor expertise’s fork, by only sending transactions which follow the
new expertise’s protocols. In this situation forks are a good thing: forks recognize and empower minority opinions to
serve the market.
This freedom to clone and fork is also a valuable answer to the censorship problem: the protocols for transaction
censorship will be clearly analyzable in the forum. Any minority which is being censored will create the incentive to
clone the SPoS expertise and fork the chain in order to enable those transactions.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

when more fees are attracted, which happens when the platform is improved. 3) Rent-
seeking stakeholders who do not participate in the validation process will generally suffer
from the inflationary nature of the token.
Finally the nature of the platform is decentralized in the sense40 that if all but one of the
nodes goes offline unexpectedly, the blockchain will continue and can regenerate from the
one node41. This is because the protocol chooses future producers from the existing
availability smart contracts; and when a producer doesn’t submit a block, future producers
are still chosen.
2. Autonomy. The platform on a SPoS blockchain achieves perfect autonomy. The bench,
the forum and the validation pool run off the platform’s smart contract which runs entirely
on the gas of whatever blockchain it is posted to.
Consensus is established in the forum, which is simply a collection of linked posts to the
blockchain. Consensus on every suggested protocol upgrade, including program upgrades
to the platform DApp itself, is determined entirely by the bench, after debate in the forum,
when validation pools conclude. There is no need for any outside centralized foundation to
organize protocol forks, such as deciding how and when to scale or shard to handle more
transactions, or what the standards are for block creation and policing. All protocol
upgrades are therefore handled swiftly, decisively, and openly, with minimal disruption,
through the weighted democracy of sem-staked decision making.
The incentive for developers to propose improved protocols on chain comes from the
potential for reward given by the reference system in the forum WDAG. This allows future
posts to reference development posts which initially attracted no fees, in order to share
their fees as a matter of protocol.
This also solves the debate over how to slash. There are, of course, infinitely many possible
protocols for determining when and how an expert producer should be punished for
producing a corrupt block, whether fighting against double spending/forking, or
censorship, or other attacks. Whatever protocol is adopted will witness hacking/gaming
attempts. The forum and validation pool will provide the evolutionary ecosystem for
continually improving slashing protocols.
3. Efficiency. Compared with PoW implementations, such as bitcoin and Ethereum, SPoS is
far more computationally efficient. Nodes will no longer hash mine. They will check the
validity of the blocks, but they do that under any blockchain. The only added computation
is the validation pool which happens once for each block, where nodes send one
transaction, an up- or downvote.
40 This definition is attributed to Matthew Wampler-Doty as reported in: Vlad Zamfir, “The History of Casper,
Chapter 5” Medium, December 30th, 2016 (Online) https://medium.com/@Vlad_Zamfir/the-history-of-casper-
chapter-5-8652959cef58 retrieved December 10, 2017.
41This is a type of liveness, technically called freedom from deadlock.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

4. Anonymity. Reputation is determined by actions validated on the platform, independent
of any other establishment of identity. The most common actions are faithfully running the
programs established in the forum to validate and produce blocks according to protocol.
5. Security. Probity is assured via the positive feedback loop with properly aligned
incentives.
a. Fees from public users are shared with all experts through the reputation-weighted
salary, so expert users are motivated to produce maximally useful blocks and to
police other experts’ block production, in order for the system to attract more fees
from public users.
b. Finality for a block (the state where a block is confidently considered to be a
permanent part of the chain) is measurable under SPoS.
First, a measurable number of expert validators risked their sem tokens on the bet
that the block was valid.
Secondly, the sem that members gain from policing block production is equal to
half of all fees sent since the production of the block. In order to fork a chain from
that particular block, the community will lose all sem tokens created subsequently
on the chain to be forked.
Further, since the value of the sem tokens is in the promise of future fees, all token
holders are motivated to maintain the long-term stability of the chain, and less
motivated by arbitrage opportunities from malicious forks or censorship.
c. Slashing42 is a natural part of SPoS through the loss of availability stakes, a strong
disincentive for any violation of the hard protocols validated in the forum. This
solves the nothing-at-stake problem (or tragedy of the commons problem)
associated with previous chain-based PoS protocols.
The possibility of review through references in the forum to change the value of
sem tokens allows slashing to address more subtle, long-term patterns of “spirit of
the law” soft protocol violations.
d. Liveness faults43. When users don’t participate in block creation or validation they
are naturally punished by a devaluation of their sem token holdings from the natural
inflation of the token which occurs during token creation. This punishment is stable
42 Vitalik Buterin, “Slasher: A Punitive Proof-of-Stake Algorithm”, Ethereum Blog, January 15th, 2014 (Online)
https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/01/15/slasher-a-punitive-proof-of-stake-algorithm/ retrieved December 10, 2017.
43 Vitalik Buterin & Virgil Griffith, “Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation, November 15th,
2017. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.09437.pdf retrieved December 10, 2017
and
Vitalik Buterin, “Incentives in Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation, August 27th, 2017.
https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/casper-economics/casper_economics_basic.pdf
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

in the sense that it does not dramatically and unfairly punish honest users who lose
connectivity, so honest users do not lose security for their investment as nodes.
e. Blacklists. Besides the slashing of availability stakes, producers and validators who
demonstrate subtle, long-term patterns of protocol violation, such as censorship of
transactions, may be added to blacklists developed in the forum. Then any new
block produced by a token holder from the blacklist would be invalidated by
majority vote. The openness of the blockchain allows analysis of past blocks in
order to write these blacklists, and the validation pool ensures accuracy and fairness
in their creation. Blacklisted users will not lose their tokens, which adds stability to
the system, giving token holders confidence the system is not arbitrary and fickle.
Blacklisted users will have the ability to argue their case in the forum using their
tokens while they remain. While they are blacklisted, however, they will not be able
to gain sem by producing any further successful blocks. Due to the natural inflation
of the sem tokens, the blacklisted producers stakes will inevitably diminish in value
as further blocks are produced.
f. 51% attacks are inhibited in a measurable manner through the mechanisms
described in a), c) and d) above, and because the feedback loop is closed and
complete. (See Appendix A for proof.)
In the various 51% attacks a group that owns a significant percentage of the
governing tokens can profit at the expense of the platform and the other users by
exerting their power. The 51% attack is particularly dangerous in decentralized
systems with potentially anonymous users because there is usually no recourse to
dispute resolution. Therefore if there is the opportunity to maliciously profit,
someone in the world will certainly take advantage.
One type of 51% attack is the arbitrage scenario where a group will buy up 51% of
the tokens, make a short term profit at the expense of other users (double spending,
editing, or censoring, e.g.) then quickly sell off the tokens before their value
declines from the damage done.
Almost all other blockchain platforms sell off a significant number of their tokens
in an initial token sale, or mine them, or a combination of both. Either way, these
tokens are almost always perfectly fungible currencies.
The platform’s tokens herein are different than most every other platform’s tokens.
They can theoretically be bought and sold by buying the anonymous user’s account.
So sem tokens are valuable, but not perfectly fungible for 3 reasons.
i. Sem tokens do not hold their value as well as other currencies, naturally
experiencing significant deflation. This is because more sem tokens are
added to the system every time a fee is sent to the platform, so their relative
value in earning the reputation-weighted salary constantly diminishes. (See
Appendix A.2.) Therefore, if they are not being used constantly to improve
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

the platform (and thereby gain more sem tokens), they punish the users for
holding them by losing relative value. This gives strong incentive for
maintaining nodes and actively policing the system.
ii. Sem tokens are not equally valuable to all people. People with the proper
skills and knowledge in the expertise will naturally win more validation
pools than others, thereby gaining more sem tokens, and ultimately more
perfectly fungible currency through the reputation-weighted salary.
iii. The value of a sem token derives from its position in the reference system
in the WDAG. So each token is subject to a variable, relative value which
may change in time.
Therefore it is more difficult to attack the platform herein than other platforms by
buying 51% of the sem tokens because 1) most of the tokens should be constantly
in use, 2) more are being created all the time, 3) holding them for a long period of
time without improving the platform (and earning more sem) is costly due to the
natural inflation of the token, and 4) their value is difficult to determine since each
token has a different value depending on the post in which it was minted. So it is
almost impossible to execute a 51% attack by purchasing tokens on an exchange.
Another attack vector is to buy the tokens directly from the platform, by sending
fees to the platform. However, in this case even if the attack were successful, the
attacker would lose a significant amount of money to achieve their goal, at least
twice the entire historical value of the platform--more likely the factor would be 6
times the total value (see Appendix A.1 for a proof). So the griefing factor is a
minimum of 2 with an average of 6, and has no effect unless the platform is
destroyed. Further, whether or not the platform is destroyed, all the fees would go
entirely to the users who built the platform, who would profit significantly during
the attack, even if successful.
If such an attack were identified, users could stop it by policing the creation of new
SPoS sem tokens, preventing any new users from gaining tokens. In this case, those
tokens bought by the attacker would eventually lose value through natural inflation,
and the attack would completely fail, while rewarding the users who honestly
policed the attack.
Finally, the extremely decentralized nature described in 1) above, makes it more
difficult to achieve consensus between colluding whales in the platform herein than
in other platforms, because power is naturally distributed more sparsely.
g. The long-range attack is a common problem with PoS protocols, where a
malicious producer may create a long list of blocks forked from an earlier valid
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

block, because there is no PoW energetic outlay required to prevent this44.
Essentially, a new node can join the network and see the genuine chain and a
fabricated chain that is longer; then the new node, lacking the proof of work hashes,
could not objectively distinguish which is correct. Casper and Tendermint solve
this problem with a system of token locking.
SPoS naturally prevents this attack without such locking, since a false chain cannot
be manufactured with more total validation than the real chain. Validators’ public
keys are used to vote (each vote is a transaction moving their sem tokens), so votes
cannot be forged from existing sem tokens. Therefore, not even a single fake block
can be produced which has a stronger number of upvotes in order to fabricate a
stronger fork. In this sense SPoS uses the validation pool to create proof-of-strong-
collaboration in place of bitcoin’s hash-mining proof-of-work to allow distributed
verification of block validity.
h. Perverse delegates. In any PoS protocol, especially DPoS, the motives of the
producers are more likely to be avaricious than average, because those with
perverse motives are more likely to make the effort to produce blocks and risk
slashing. The ability to achieve clear consensus on validation protocols in the forum
makes it easy to police adverse actions without the need for any extra incentive
besides preserving the value of your sem token holdings.
i. Sybil attacks are prevented with weighted voting, because all actions on the
platform are fairly evaluated as determined by holdings of openly verified
reputation; thus power is not increased by distributing it amongst cloned accounts
j. Tyranny of the majority is inhibited since all actions are reviewed by users
weighted by reputation (sem), so direct democracy does not dilute expertise.
k. Stake grinding attack. In any decentralized PoS protocol there needs to be an
automated mechanism for determining when and who produces a block. Generally
it is a given that in a decentralized system, the selection should be random, weighted
according to the producers’ stakeholdings. The randomness must be achieved with
a pseudo-random number generator whose algorithm and seed must be available
for verification by all nodes. If the protocol is not carefully chosen, this introduces
an attack vector, called stake grinding, in which malicious producers might
manipulate the seed in order to influence the selection in their favor.
As discussed above, in SPoS the seed used is a hash of the joined alphabetized
symmetric keys that were submitted by all validators during the vote revealing
process. This protocol completely prevents stake grinding even if only one validator
is not colluding.
44 See Andrew Poelstra, “On Stake and Consensus”, March 2015, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://download.wpsoftware.net/bitcoin/pos.pdf for a cogent criticism of many PoS protocols.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

l. Censorship can be good or bad for the platform. Good censorship includes
preventing transactions which destroy the larger reputation of the platform, such as
selling child pornography or chemical weapons. Bad censorship is more subtle,
such as preventing competing organizations from registering transactions. Both
types of censorship are naturally dealt with in the forum. Further, strong minority
opinions at odds with the majority of validators have the freedom and power to
create an alternate chain with different protocols within a new expertise in the
platform.
m. The 𝑷+𝝐 attack45 is no more effective than the 51% attack, because typical
validators will be staking all their available sem tokens in each validation pool.
n. Blockchain clones. We cannot prevent a malicious party from using Sybil accounts
to copy the general structure of a successful PoS blockchain. They would need to
create new public keys, but the cost would still be much (much) lower than it would
to copy a PoW blockchain’s structure. Then, when a new user joins the network,
how will they be able to distinguish a truly decentralized blockchain from a cloned
blockchain that has manufactured an even larger number of tokens?
The answer is, the same way a new internet user knows not to visit cloned web
pages. Their UI is a trusted internet browser which steers them to a trusted search
engine, which has ranked web pages throughout their history to distinguish their
value. A trusted UI for interacting with blockchains has the same role.
o. Soft protocol changes. There will always be changes in market forces, network
performance, computing technology, cryptographic standards, social values, and
the goals of any particular blockchain. Therefore there will always be the need to
change block production and validation protocols. Therefore, in addition to the
fundamental fact that no protocol is perfectly secure, there will always be the threat
that the nodes will accept a deeply flawed protocol that can destroy a blockchain.
If the protocol does not involve a decentralized medium for cheap and available
communication that is eternally open to review, then the risks from centralization
compound the danger.
The means by which all current major blockchains achieve their soft forks is
through private communication between famous token-holding whales and
developers. This results in a state of governance which is completely counter to the
blockchain design goals of decentralization, anonymity, and autonomy. Any
blockchain subject to such governance is ultimately less secure than legacy
centralized systems which pointedly address centralized security risks.
Since soft protocol changes are a perpetual risk, proper incentivization for protocol
upgrades is crucial. The forum is the needed decentralized medium for cheap and
45 Vitalik Buterin, “The P + epsilon Attack”, Ethereum Blog, January 28th, 2015 (Online)
https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/01/28/p-epsilon-attack/ retrieved January 23rd, 2018.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

available communication that is eternally open to review. The reference process of
the forum WDAG rewards long-term protocol upgrades.
7 Summary and Conclusion
Any crypto platform or blockchain can employ the SPoS protocol to incorporate PoS by accessing
the platform. The platform is a completely decentralized and autonomous smart contract which
provides validated reputation, and it is secure against the Sybil attack, Tyranny of the majority
problem, and the 51% attacks that have plagued all previous centralized and decentralized
reputation verification systems. Given this secure reputation-weighted system, the stakes in SPoS
are given by the reputation tokens and the protocols follow naturally.
SPoS is more secure than other PoS protocols because it has a properly incentivized reward
structure and an evolutionary mechanism allowing on-chain protocol development in response to
inevitable attacks.
This paper gives the details of the consensus protocols and analyzes how they ensure block finality,
liveness, decentralization, autonomy, anonymity, efficiency, and especially security. Security
concerns addressed include Byzantine faults, 51% attacks, stake grinding, the nothing-at-stake
problem (tragedy of the commons), Sybil attacks, tyranny of the majority, liveness faults, DoS
attacks, perverse delegates, censorship, and soft protocol changes.
Appendix: calculations
A.1 The price to purchase 51% of the sem tokens
Here we demonstrate the attack resistance of the platform by showing that in the absolute worst-
case scenario, the price to corrupt the system from within is a minimum of twice the total historical
fees added to the system. If any obvious protections are instituted, the price to corrupt grows
steeply.
Consider the situation where the platform has a total of 𝑔 sem tokens at time 0. We will refer to
8
all these users as good-faith experts46. Imagine a malicious group 𝑚 wishes to purchase 51% of
the total sem tokens with fees, either to profit from future transactions or to destroy trust in the
particular expertise tag. Since only half of their fees are added as sem tokens for the malicious
46 The good-faith experts do not need to behave altruistically; they are simply required to not collude with the new,
malicious group and to act in their own self-interest to protect the value of their investments.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

group, and the other half will be added to the existing good-faith actors it is difficult to achieve the
malicious goal, even in this worst-case scenario.
Under the worst-case scenario, we suppose there are no safeguards against joining as an expert—
any fee of any size is automatically accepted in the validation pool, and resolved instantly with no
time delays. Finally we assume no other users are adding any fees.
Under this scenario, the best strategy for the malicious group to gain sem tokens by paying fees is
to make many micro-payments. In the same way that continuously-compounded interest is better
than discrete interest at the same rate, micro-payments allow malicious users to profit off their own
later fees once their earlier fees vest them with sem tokens.
Thus we assume the malicious group 𝑚 will add a variable number 𝑛 of fixed fees of size ∆𝑥 ≪ 1.
Then the good faith experts will have
1 𝑔
=
𝑔 = 𝑔 + ∆𝑥( )
=>? = 2 𝑔 +𝑛∆𝑥
8
sem tokens after 𝑛+1 fee payments from the malicious users, with 𝑔 being the initial total sem
8
tokens of the platform, while the malicious user will have
1 𝑚 1
=
𝑚 = 𝑚 + ∆𝑥( )+ ∆𝑥
=>? = 2 𝑔 +𝑛∆𝑥 2
8
sem tokens, with 𝑚 = 0. Therefore
8
∆𝑔 1 𝑔
=>? =
= ( )
∆𝑥 2 𝑔 +𝑛∆𝑥
8
which becomes the ODE
𝑑𝑔 1 𝑔
= ( )
𝑑𝑥 2 𝑔 +𝑥
8
as ∆𝑥 → 0. Similarly
𝑑𝑚 1 𝑚 1
= ( )+
𝑑𝑥 2 𝑔 +𝑥 2
8
We want to know how many fees 𝑥 are required before the malicious group can overwhelm the
system with 51% sem token power, so we solve 𝑔(𝑥) = 𝑚(𝑥) for 𝑥.
Solving the ODEs using the method of integrating factors gives the formulas
𝑔(𝑥) = D𝑔 E +𝑔 𝑥
8 8
and
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

𝑚(𝑥) = 𝑥+𝑔 −D𝑔 E +𝑔 𝑥
8 8 8
So 𝑚 overwhelms the system once 𝑥 = 3𝑔 .
8
However, while the malicious users are paying their fees, they are also receiving salary payments
that are increasing as they gain sem tokens. While paying the 3𝑔 in fees, the total salary regained
8
by the malicious group is
IJK 𝑚(𝑥)
H 𝑑𝑥 = 𝑔
𝑚(𝑥)+𝑔(𝑥) 8
8
Consequently the malicious group would need to invest an absolute minimum of 2𝑔 , that is,
8
double the total sem tokens of the system to gain 50% power in the system in order to outvote the
rest of the good-faith experts in the validation pool.
We stress that the value of 2𝑔 is an extremely conservative lower bound. In practice, the
8
investments would need to be discrete values, not continuous. This significantly raises the
minimum corrupting investment, and significantly lengthens the time needed to gain 51% power.
Also, in practice many other users will be paying fees besides the malicious group, especially if
the malicious group is pumping fees into the system.
Assuming the malicious group does manage to take over the platform, the rest of the world would
immediately see the unfair action that couldn’t be rectified by the good-faith actors, so the expertise
tag would topple, losing its value. The malicious group would merely gain the (fraction) of the fee
from one transaction. As long as any single fee is smaller than the total sem tokens, there is no
incentive to game the system for fees.
The only other reason to act maliciously is to destroy the particular expertise. But then the 2𝑔
8
invested becomes worthless. So the minimum cost at any time to topple the system is twice the
total sem tokens—assuming you can simply buy sem tokens without limit or oversight.
Therefore as long as the fees are low compared to the sem token total, or if there is no competitor
that is suffering by the platform’s existence by more than twice the total number of sem tokens,
it’s not worth spending money to corrupt the system—it is more valuable to use the power to
improve the platform.
Further, as fees are added, sem tokens are added, so it becomes more secure as time goes on, even
assuming constant fees.
Further, if a malicious group wishes to strike, their best strategy is to strike immediately. Their
corrupt sem tokens become less valuable if they don’t use them, as each new fee they didn’t add
to the system adds to other peoples’ tokens, diminishing the value of older tokens. So even if there
are many different malicious groups, if no single malicious group gains 51% control, the system
cannot be corrupted to unfairly earn fees.
A malicious group is therefore limited to attempting to destroy the platform, by overwhelming it
with fees. If that is happening, and there is a reasonable time-delay in resolving validation pools,
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

then the incoming malicious fees would encourage other, non-colluding parties to invest as well.
This would significantly slow the effort to gain 51% for the malicious group.
Specifically, assume the good-faith experts invest some constant fraction 𝑐 of the malicious
groups’ investment ∆𝑥 at each time. If 𝑐 ≥ 1then the malicious group will never gain more than
50% power. So assume 0 < 𝑐 < 1. Then the equations become
𝑑𝑔 1 𝑔 1
= (1+𝑐)( )+ 𝑐
𝑑𝑥 2 𝑔 +(1+𝑐)𝑥 2
8
and
OP ? P ?
= (1+𝑐)( )+
OQ E JK>(?>R)Q E
which are solved to give
D𝑔 +(1+𝑐)𝑥
𝑔(𝑥) = 8 (𝑐D𝑔 +(1+𝑐)𝑥+𝑔 ?/E)
1+𝑐 8 8
and
D𝑔 +(1+𝑐)𝑥
𝑚(𝑥) = 8 (D𝑔 +(1+𝑐)𝑥−𝑔 ?/E)
1+𝑐 8 8
Then the solution to 𝑔(𝑥) = 𝑚(𝑥)
4 𝑔
8
𝑥 = [ −1]
(1−𝑐)E 1+𝑐
is the total amount the malicious group 𝑚 must invest, and they recover
Q 𝑚(𝑥) 1 2𝑔 ?/E
8
H 𝑑𝑥 = W𝑥− [X𝑔 +(1+𝑐)𝑥−D𝑔 ]Y
𝑚(𝑥)+𝑔(𝑥) 1+𝑐 1+𝑐 8 8
8
of those outlays through reputation-weighted salary. So the final cost to override the system when
good-faith experts are investing the fraction 𝑐 of the malicious investment is
4 𝑔 𝑐 2𝑔 ?/E
8 8
[ −3] + X𝑔 +(1+𝑐)𝑥
(1−𝑐)E (1+𝑐)E (1+𝑐)E 8
For instance, if the malicious group is doubling the investment of the rest of the community, then
Z[
𝑐 = 1/2 and 𝑥 = 10𝑔 of total sem tokens must be spent in fees, while more than 𝑔 ≈ 6.44𝑔
8 8 8
\
will be lost.
To improve simulations, we can also solve the recurrence relation directly, without moving to the
ODEs, since the recurrence relation is first order and linear:
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

1 𝑔 1
=
𝑔 = 𝑔 + (1+𝑐)∆𝑥( )+ 𝑐
=>? = 2 𝑔 +𝑛(1+𝑐)∆𝑥 2
8
has solution
𝑔 1 𝑔
((1+𝑐)∆𝑥−𝑐)𝛤(1+ 8 )𝛤(𝑛+ + 8 )
𝑔 𝑐 (1+𝑐)∆𝑥 2 (1+𝑐)∆𝑥
8
𝑔 = +𝑛𝑐+
=>? (1+𝑐)∆𝑥 1 𝑔 𝑔
𝛤( + 8 )𝛤(𝑛+ 8 )
2 (1+𝑐)∆𝑥 (1+𝑐)∆𝑥
where 𝛤 is the gamma function, while
1 𝑚 1
=
𝑚 = 𝑚 + (1+𝑐)∆𝑥( )+ ∆𝑥
=>? = 2 𝑔 +𝑛(1+𝑐)∆𝑥 2
8
has solution
∆Q_(?>
‘K
)_(=>
a
>
‘K
)
𝑚 = JK +𝑛∆𝑥− (abc)∆d e (abc)∆d .
=>?
?>R _(
a
>
‘K
)_(=>
‘K
)
e (abc)∆d (abc)∆d
A.2 Natural sem token inflation
In this section we illustrate the value of one sem token with a few calculations. This demonstrates
the value of an investment in sem tokens in the platform without using its power to evaluate posts.
The conclusion is that the economy is inflationary at equilibrium, which improves its security and
discourages rent-seeking.
One sem token loses value if fees are constantly added in time.
If fees are being paid into an expertise tag at a constant rate of 𝐹(𝑡) = 𝑟 units per time, then the
salary paid for one coin decreases in time. To see this, denote the total number of sem tokens in
the tag at time 𝑡 by 𝑇(𝑡). The salary per token per unit time is 𝑆 = 𝐹/𝑇. However, since each fee
token creates a new sem token, we have
𝑇(𝑡) = 𝑇(0)+𝑟𝑡
so
𝑟
𝑆(𝑡) =
𝑇(0)+𝑟𝑡
which shrinks to 0 as time goes on.
One sem token loses value if fees grow linearly in time.
If the fees are given by 𝐹(𝑡) ≔ 𝑐𝑡 then the sem token recurrence relation 𝑇(𝑡+1) = 𝑇(𝑡)+𝐹(𝑡)
can be solved to give
𝑇(𝑡) = 𝑇(0)+𝐹(0)+𝑐𝑡(𝑡−1)/2
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

so
Rk
𝑆(𝑡) =
l(8)>m(8)>Rk(kn?)/E
which still shrinks to 0 as time goes on.
One sem token pays constantly if fees grow exponentially in time.
If the fees are given by 𝐹(𝑡) ≔ 𝐹(0)𝑒Rk then a sem token satisfies the recurrence relation 𝑇(𝑡+
1) = 𝑇(𝑡)+𝐹(𝑡) which may be solved to give
𝑒Rk −1
𝑇(𝑡) = 𝑇(0)+𝐹(0)
𝑒p −1
so
𝑆(𝑡) = m = m(8)rcs → 𝑒p −1
q tcsua
q(8)>m(8)
tvua
as 𝑡 → ∞.
Early sem tokens are more valuable than later tokens.
All sem tokens in a single expertise tag are equal at any given moment. However, assuming a
steady state rate of fees, the payout for 1 year from inception is greater for tokens minted earlier,
because later tokens are a smaller percentage of the total. Remember, new tokens are created with
every fee paid into the platform, but never destroyed.
This may mean later experts have less motivation to join if fees paid into the system are at a steady
state. To combat this, the bench may choose to change the exchange rate between fees and sem
tokens to encourage new recruits.
References
Iddo Bentov, Ariel Gabizon, & Alex Mizrahi, “Cryptocurrencies without Proof of Work”, 2014,
(Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://arxiv.org/abs/1406.5694
Blackcoin, “Security Analysis of Proof-of-Stake Protocol v3.0”, October 17th, 2016, (Online)
Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://bravenewcoin.com/assets/Whitepapers/Blackcoin-POS-
3.pdf
Gabriel Bracha, “Asynchronous Byzantine agreement protocols”, Information and Computation,
Volume 75, Issue 2, November 1987, pp. 130-143.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

Ethan Buchman, “Tendermint: Byzantine Fault Tolerance in the Age of Blockchains”, Master’s
Thesis, The University of Guelph, June, 2016. (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://atrium.lib.uoguelph.ca/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10214/9769/Buchman_Ethan_201606_MA
sc.pdf?sequence=7&isAllowed=y
Vitalik Buterin, “Automated Censorship Attack Rejection”, Ethereum Foundation, August 15th,
2017 (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/censorship_rejection/censorship_rejecti
on.pdf
Vitalik Buterin, “Incentives in Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation,
August 27, 2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/casper-
economics/casper_economics_basic.pdf
Vitalik Buterin, “Ethereum: A next-generation smart contract and decentralized application
platform”, 2014. (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper
Vitalik Buterin, “The P + epsilon attack”, 2015, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/01/28/p-epsilon-attack/
Vitalik Buterin, “Slasher: A Punitive Proof-of-Stake Algorithm”, Ethereum Blog, January 15th,
2014 (Online) https://blog.ethereum.org/2014/01/15/slasher-a-punitive-proof-of-stake-algorithm/
retrieved December 10, 2017.
Vitalik Buterin, “The P + epsilon Attack”, Ethereum Blog, January 28th, 2015 (Online)
https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/01/28/p-epsilon-attack/ retrieved January 23rd, 2018.
Vitalik Buterin, et al., “Proof of Stake FAQ”, edited October 30, 2017,
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/Proof-of-Stake-FAQ retrieved December 10, 2017.
Vitalik Buterin & Virgil Griffith, “Casper the Friendly Finality Gadget”, Ethereum Foundation,
November, 15, 2017. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1710.09437.pdf retrieved December 10, 2017.
Jing Chen & Silvio Micali, “ALGORAND”, May 2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1607.01341.pdf
Luis Cuende & Jorge Izquierdo, “Aragon Network: A decentralized infrastructure for value
exchange, Version 1.1”, April 20th, 2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://aragon.one/network/
Phil Daian, Rafael Pass, & Elaine Shi, “Snow White: Robustly Reconfigurable Consensus and
Applications to Provably Secure Proofs of Stake” Retrieved December 7th, 2017 (Online)
Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/919
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

Isabella Dell, Oliver Beddows, Laurent Meunier, Max Kordek, “The Lisk Protocol”, Retrieved
December 7th, 2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://docs.lisk.io/v1.3/docs/the-
lisk-protocol
Richard Dennis & Gareth Owen, “Rep on the block : A next generation reputation system based
on the blockchain”, The 10th International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured
Transactions, 2015. (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 http://www.the-
blockchain.com/docs/A%20next%20generation%20reputation%20system%20based%20on%20t
he%20blockchain.pdf
Evan Duffield & Daniel Diaz, “Dash: A Privacy-Centric Crypto-Currency”, March 2017,
(Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://github.com/dashpay/dash/wiki/Whitepaper
Fred Ehrsam, “Funding the Evolution of Blockchains”, Medium.com, August 24th, 2017,
(Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://medium.com/@FEhrsam/funding-the-evolution-
of-blockchains-87d160988481
Fred Ehrsam, “Blockchain Governance: Programming Our Future”, Medium.com, November
27th, 2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://medium.com/@FEhrsam/blockchain-
governance-programming-our-future-c3bfe30f2d74
Robert C. Ellickson, Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes, Harvard University
Press, 1994.
F. Randall Farmer & Bryce Glass, Building Web Reputation Systems, Yahoo Press, 2010.
Michael J. Fischer, Nancy A. Lynch, & Michael S. Paterson, “Impossibility of Distributed
Consensus with One Faulty Process”, Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery,
Volume 32, Number 2, April 1985, pp. 374-382. Available Online
https://groups.csail.mit.edu/tds/papers/Lynch/jacm85.pdf retrieved December 10, 2017.
L.M Goodman, “Tezos: A Self-Amending Crypto-Ledger; Position Paper”, August 2014,
(Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://www.tezos.com/static/papers/position_paper.pdf
Gnosis Whitepaper 05.04.2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://gnosis.pm/resources/default/pdf/gnosis_whitepaper.pdf
Zackary Hess, Yanislav Malahov, Jack Pettersson, “Æternity blockchain: The trustless,
decentralized and purely functional oracle machine, DRAFT”, December 28, 2016. (Online)
Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://aeternity.com/aeternity-blockchain-whitepaper.pdf
Aggelos Kiayias, Alexander Russell, Bernardo David, & Roman Oliynykov, “Ouroboros: A
Provably Secure Proof-of-Stake Blockchain Protocol”, August 2017, (Online) Retrieved
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

December 18th, 2017 https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/889 Update available at
https://cardanodocs.com/cardano/proof-of-stake/
S. King and S. Nadal. “Ppcoin: Peer-to-peer crypto-currency with proof-of-stake”, 2012,
(Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://peercoin.net/assets/paper/peercoin-paper.pdf
Küpçü A., Lysyanskaya A., “Optimistic Fair Exchange with Multiple Arbiters”, In: Gritzalis D.,
Preneel B., Theoharidou M. (eds) Computer Security – ESORICS 2010. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol 6345, Springer, 2010.
Jae Kwon, “Tendermint: Consensus without mining“, 2014, (Online) retrieved December 10,
2017 https://tendermint.com/static/docs/tendermint.pdf
Manuel Sebastian Mariani, Mat ́uˇs Medo, & Yi-Cheng Zhang, “Ranking nodes in growing
networks: When PageRank fails”, Nature, November 2015.
Andrew Miller, Yu Xia, Kyle Croman, Elaine Shi, & Dawn Song, “The Honey Badger of BFT
Protocols”, February 2016, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/199
Alias, et al., “Nxt Whitepaper”, Revision 4, Nxt v1.2.2, July 2014, (Online) Retrieved December
7th, 2017 https://bravenewcoin.com/assets/Whitepapers/NxtWhitepaper-v122-rev4.pdf
Satoshi Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system”, 2008, [Online] Retrieved
December 7th, 2017 https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
“NEM Technical Reference” Version 1.0, May 2015, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://nem.io/wp-content/themes/nem/files/NEM_techRef.pdf
Elinor Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action,
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Jack Peterson & Joseph Krug, “Augur: a Decentralized, Open-Source Platform for Prediction
Markets”, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://bravenewcoin.com/assets/Whitepapers/Augur-A-Decentralized-Open-Source-Platform-
for-Prediction-Markets.pdf
Andrew Poelstra, “On Stake and Consensus”, March 2015, (Online) Retrieved December 7th,
2017 https://download.wpsoftware.net/bitcoin/pos.pdf
Alex Rea, Aron Fischer, Jack du Rose, “COLONY, Technical White Paper 20170920”, (Online)
Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://colony.readme.io/docs
Yonatan Sompolinsky & Aviv Zohar, “Secure High-Rate Transaction Processing in Bitcoin (full
version)”, Cryptology ePrint Archive, 2013. (Online) https://eprint.iacr.org/2013/881.pdf
retrieved December 10, 2017.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

Alexis deTocqueville, Democracy in America, 1835. (Harvey Mansfield and Delba Winthrop,
trans., ed., University of Chicago Press, 2000.)
Chjango Unchained, “Consensus Compare: Casper vs. Tendermint”, Cosmos, November 16th,
2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://blog.cosmos.network/consensus-compare-
casper-vs-tendermint-6df154ad56ae
Chjango Unchained, “Consensus Compare: Tendermint BFT vs. EOS dPoS”, Cosmos,
September 29th, 2017, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017
https://blog.cosmos.network/consensus-compare-tendermint-bft-vs-eos-dpos-46c5bca7204b
Timo Hanke, Mahnush Movahedi and Dominic Williams, “DFINITY Technology Overview
Series; Consensus System, Rev.1”, January 23rd, 2018. (Online) Retrieved January 28th, 2018
https://dfinity.org/pdf-viewer/pdfs/viewer?file=../library/dfinity-consensus.pdf
Gavin Wood, “Polkadot: Vision for a Heterogeneous Multi-chain Framework”, Draft 1,
December 2016, (Online) Retrieved December 7th, 2017 https://github.com/polkadot-
io/polkadot-white-paper/blob/master/PolkaDotPaper.pdf
Vlad Zamfir, “Casper the Friendly Ghost: A ‘Correct-by-Construction’ Blockchain Consensus
Protocol DRAFT v0.1”, Ethereum Foundation, December 18, 2017. (Online)
https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/CasperTFG/CasperTFG.pdf retrieved
January 24th, 2018.
Vlad Zamfir, “The History of Casper, Chapters 1-5” Medium, December 30th, 2016 (Online)
https://medium.com/@Vlad_Zamfir/the-history-of-casper-chapter-5-8652959cef58 retrieved
December 10, 2017.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827

