Chapter ) – Finance 1
Decentralized Finance (DeFi)
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
Chapter ) discusses the role of finance in the evolution of decentralized systems.
In the 9:9:s, the market for DeFi has started to take off but fully decentralized DeFi
solutions still have a long way to go. Because the decentralized economy is still missing
the major institutions that society relies on to conduct profitable business, especially
a secure and meaningful system for evaluating reputation for anonymous suprana-
tional partners, and an effective and dynamic governance system, it will not be able
to fully proliferate until these systems have established themselves. Once these core
decentralized infrastructure products become available, the decentralized economy
becomes viable. Key indicators include cryptocurrency being used in authentic trans-
actions such as insurance and equities in broad segments of industry and the tokeni-
zation of commodities and properties in a mainstream environment.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Chapter 6. Finance
“Finance is not merely about making money. It’s about achieving our deep goals
and protecting the fruits of our labor. It’s about stewardship and, therefore, about
achieving the good society.” – Robert J. Shiller
Decentralized finance (deFi) has been the goal of blockchains since their inception
with Bitcoin. The goal of WebT is to provide intuitive UIs for complex financial tools,
unleashing the economic potential of humanity—similar to how Web 9.: tapped into
the power of decentralized information. The major financial tools that the WebT
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

2 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
crowd is currently working on include payment, investment, trading, lending, and in-
surance via P9P technology. Ethereum is leading the way in 9:9: due to their support
of innovative smart contracts, with approximately T% of their ether tokens (market
cap 9[ billion USD) locked in deFi smart contracts.
The obvious concern with WebT enabled deFi is that the average customer will
not be protected without a centralized bureaucracy to maintain order. Since the de-
centralized economy is currently lacking in many of the civil institutions that we enjoy
in the larger economy, the average person should not invest anything in the crypto
economy. In this chapter we discuss what is emerging and what is missing and what
can be done to include more people in the decentralized economy.
Bitcoin transactions proved digital payment could be decentralized. Ethereum
proved investment could be decentralized with initial coin offerings (ICOs). These ICOs
are analogous to initial public offerings (IPOs), but are open to anyone on the planet
who has access to the internet. In other words, ICOs allow anyone to participate in
business investment.
The ICO is run by a smart contract which can create any type of business logic.
The ICO smart contract creates digital tokens—the coins of the ICO—which represent
equity ownership in a DAO. These tokens may be programmed to confer voting power
to their owners or any other rights imaginable in the DAO, such as automated profit
sharing or control of functions within the company. The ICO smart contract specifies
how many tokens can be created and sold, for what price, at what time. Anyone with
a public key address in the Ethereum blockchain who satisfies the contract by trans-
ferring the required assets at the right time will be given ownership of the DAO equity
tokens. ICOs can be programmed with a single line of code with a secure, carefully
audited smart contract using ZeppelinOS. The confusion behind legal regulation in var-
ious jurisdictions makes it more difficult than that sounds, but in principle, a decen-
tralized process for investing in decentralized companies has been technologically
solved.
In the rest of the chapter we explore further financial tools that are needed for
the future decentralized economy, including banking, trading marketplaces, insurance
and lending, and stablecoins.
Banking and ZKRollups
Blockchain transactions will always be expensive compared with other P9P trans-
actions. Blockchain transactions are required to be stored eternally and redundantly
on as many machines as possible to aid decentralization. Other P9P transactions, such
as distributed hash table transactions can be forgotten, and stored temporarily on a
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 3
variable number of computers based on how important or valuable the information
is.
Therefore, there is a difference of efficiencies that can be exploited to earn a
profit by bundling small transactions in temporary storage. Then, once the bundle be-
comes valuable enough, make a single permanent transaction on the blockchain which
secures all the small transactions at once.
The most obvious application is for currency transactions. This is already done to
some degree, opaquely, with centralized companies, such as exchanges. But these
have famously lost or stolen many billions of USD. Decentralized exchanges (referred
to as DEXs) are possible between separate blockchains with some cryptographically
secure tricks starting with atomic swaps, and they’re becoming more complicated with
the :x protocol, MakerDAO’s smart contract, Plasma on Ethereum, Lightning Network
on Bitcoin, etc.
The increase in price efficiency is matched by the increase in speed. Decentralized
banking helps solve a major problem with blockchains called scaling. If you double the
number of participants and transactions, the linear nature of the blockchain makes it
slow down by half. To scale up to a global network like the Visa credit card company
would make Bitcoin grind to a halt. As of writing, Loopring offers an open source algo-
rithm which creates a relatively decentralized DEX for cross chain transactions starting
on Ethereum. It securely bundles transactions using ZK proofs. This makes the scheme
trustless, meaning it doesn’t matter whether you trust the bundlers or not, they can’t
steal your data. The worst that can happen—if some malicious middleman breaks the
protocol—is that your transaction doesn’t go through and you would need to resend
it.
The techie term for this cryptographically secure bundling process is a ZKRollup.
A ZKRollup starts on the blockchain (Layer c) and uses ZK proofs to bundle transactions
anonymously using more efficient non-blockchain P9P distributed hash table architec-
tures (Layer 9). Then the ZKRollup distills the extremely complicated bundle and
makes a simpler transaction on the blockchain (Layer c). The Layer 9 calculations are
fast (more bandwidth and less latency) but insecure and transient. The Layer c trans-
action secures the transactions making them permanent.
Loopring claims to scale from Ethereum’s native cd transactions per second (TPS)
to c[:,::: TPS. The Visa network handles 9e,::: TPS. However, this is merely the
volume of transactions that can happen at this average rate. c[:,::: TPS is the band-
width. The dual concept of latency is the more important measure for user experience.
Latency refers to how long you have to wait for your transaction to finalize after
you initially transmit it. These theoretical estimates of c[:,::: TPS come with a cur-
rent theoretical latency of 9: minutes or longer with a claim of theoretical latency of
c minute later in 9:9: if other updates work as promised.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

4 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
The application that banking most improves, however, is not currency tokens, but
reputation tokens. Reputation transactions include voting, resolving a validation pool
and distributing the results, the initial minting and staking of the reputation tokens,
and the reevaluation of reputation tokens through review. This is done for every single
action that is meaningful for generating reputation. The amount of computation that
is required is enormous, similar to how a blockchain needs to make hash function cal-
culations for every message sent between every member in the network. In order to
maintain consensus in a decentralized network, with no central authority to check in
with, a reputational system needs to verify each others’ votes extremely redundantly,
which leads to serious overhead costs in computation. It was not possible before the
current state of information technology. But banking can make it much more efficient
with randomly delegated validation pool judges.
Before such votes are recorded permanently, one or more validation pools could
be completely resolved. Since reputation is reviewable, it is more secure from gaming.
A few randomly-selected DAO members could be entrusted to check each other to
bundle reputation transactions, especially on the non-contentious validation pools,
since the results should always be nearly unanimous. On contentious issues, such as
debates on protocol development, the voting is loosely coupled, so there is no need
to access the blockchain.
If protocols like Loopring’s can be made truly decentralized, through good gov-
ernance, it solves one of the major technological obstacles that has been hampering
WebT. Currently, ZKRollups have only been deployed to bundle currency transactions,
but cryptographers have been improving ZK proofs and can now handle much more
complicated logic. The goal is to bundle general smart contracts. In the meantime,
banking schemes are handling general smart contracts without cryptographically se-
curing them, by using game theoretical incentivization to encourage people to hon-
estly bundle general smart contracts. Incentivization boils down to a reputation mech-
anism, where at bottom, the bundler stakes money which is slashed if they are proved
to be dishonest. Uniswap is an example.
But liquidity has always been a problem in decentralized exchanges, as meaning-
ful history and reputation are difficult to achieve when there is little to no governance
structure, no insurance, no appeals process, and no reputable decentralized news ser-
vice to help you evaluate the health of any DAO. In particular, people are used to the
security that traditional central banks provide, such as fraud protection. Decentraliz-
ing these features requires new architectures for decentralized insurance, which we
explore in the next section. Once such overhead processes are instituted and more
complicated transactions such as bank bundling are instituted, these decentralized ex-
changes will become more practically (instead of just theoretically) efficient and se-
cure.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 5
Underwriting: insurance and lending
Insurance is essential for every type of business transaction, every type of prop-
erty, every type of service you engage—every type of economic action is made more
efficient when decisions are hedged, so we can be more confident in our investments
in the future. We require the trust that the transactions will finalize satisfactorily as
planned or that the contract will be made whole by the platform running the market-
place. Decentralized insurance requires networks of policy writers with individual rep-
utations for efficient underwriting of every type of transaction.
Insurance is an essential industry for the modern economy. Like the appeals pro-
cess of the law, like policing, like the effort to keep track of reputation and maintain
the protocols of governance, insurance is an overhead cost that does not directly gen-
erate profit. It’s a type of business cost that any efficiency-minded engineer would
prefer to eliminate entirely. But inasmuch as we can’t predict the future, insurance is
valuable. Insurance improves the efficiency of the economy by investing in the future,
to guarantee the system will continue running, despite inevitable unforeseen prob-
lems. Insurance mitigates risk. Insurance helps people get over their fear of joining a
transaction because of the risk of loss. In physics jargon, insurance is a catalyst, which
provides activation energy for a transaction.
It is claimed that insurance has been practiced since the foundation of civiliza-
tion.1 Evidence from Mesopotamia suggests Mediterranean sailing merchants used
bottomage. An agent would take a loan to fund their voyages, and would promise to
return the loan with interest if successful. Bottomage is an extra amount included in
the interest. The normal interest rate was limited to 9:% if the borrower had collateral
(such as the promise to enslave his family for T years). Without collateral, the bot-
tomage rate was c::% with an unlimited loan time. Under bottomage, if the shipment
was stolen or lost at sea, the lender promised to cancel the loan. The Code of Ham-
murabi, c. chde BC, obliquely refers to this in three laws, #c:T, c:[, c:h.
The new tools of information technology give us the opportunity to improve the
efficiency and stability of underwriting through transparency and decentralization. But
how do we ensure privacy in a decentralized environment? As mentioned above in
Chapter 9, zero knowledge proofs allow individuals to retain privacy over their infor-
mation while revealing some facts. For example, a DAO devoted to health care insur-
ance could give members a synthesized health score from : to c::. The protocol for
synthesizing your complex health history could be public, but your particular health
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 Charles Farley Trenerry, The Origin and Early History of Insurance: Including the Contract of Bottomry,
P.S. King and Son, Ltd., p <. (>?@<)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

6 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
history would stay private while you reveal only your final health score to the insur-
ance DAO. Even that number could be mixed with other information, such as parts of
your property that would be tokenized and insured.
Tokenization
Early underwriting DAOs likely will be for tokenization of commodities and prop-
erties. Tokenization is the use of digital tokens to represent the ownership of physical
assets. For example, you can create an Ethereum token to represent a barrel of oil.
We can then engage a smart contract anonymously where a person can pay money
for the token. The smart contract can be trusted to execute precisely as programmed,
acting as an automated escrow service to guarantee the money is traded for the token
representing the oil.
However, the basic problem of tokenization is to determine whether a token that
claims to represent ownership of an asset truly does. Does the oil exist? Does the per-
son selling the token actually own the oil? Does giving you the token mean you can
actually make legal claim on the oil? Anyone can mint c:: billion tokens and put a
label on them, claiming they represent property on the moon. Tokenization doesn’t
mean anything without something to back it up. A token’s meaning must be attested
by something substantial. It must be underwritten by someone who is putting their
reputation—and ultimately their money—on the line to assert the validity of the to-
ken.
Consider the history of financial innovation when gold coins first replaced the bar-
ter economy. The use of gold to represent value led to major leaps in economic effi-
ciency. First, you didn’t need to bring your chickens directly to me to trade them for
my labor. Second the contract was much clearer—it was complete when money
changed hands. Third it allowed a separation of the business contracts—money traded
for chickens was separate from money traded for labor. Fourth, contracts could be
fractionalized—you couldn’t trade a fraction of a chicken so easily as you could gold.
Later paper money replaced gold coins, so you didn’t need to carry the heavy gold or
expertly assay its quality. Around d: years ago fiat cash replaced gold-backed specie,
so you didn’t need the gold at all, and nations gained a new tool for regulating their
economies. Then digital money replaced paper cash allowing light-speed transactions
over global distances.
Now tokenization allows an increase in efficiency by digitizing commodities and
properties for direct sale, while also enabling fractionalization. Further, smart con-
tracts allow us to instantiate any imaginative legal arrangement for partial ownership
and rights to properties or assets. For example, transparent public timeshares—for
houses or cars or any other physical object—can stipulate any behaviors the owners
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 7
or renters choose, with self-executing and self-regulating contracts. You can even to-
kenize your personal space, selling the right to advertise on your social media account
or selling your place in line on a carnival ride.
Tokenization will be crucial for IoT applications, which requires decentralized mar-
ketplaces as neutral territory for all the various owners within the supply chain, as
discussed further below.
Chit fund example
Another important application of underwriting is lending. An important market
for decentralized underwriting is microloans and simple insurance in markets with lit-
tle regulation, as is often the case in developing countries. Similar to how Web 9.:
capitalized on untapped decentralized market information, WebT will capitalize on
untapped economic potential by decentralizing marketplaces, which all will require
underwriting. Craig’s students, Mounvi Morthala and Sai Amulya Gandham, are devel-
oping transparent, decentralized lending schemes based on chit funds, which are com-
mon in India and have been used for centuries to provide a relatively decentralized
mechanism for insurance and lending.
Chit funds are only “relatively” decentralized, because they are traditionally run
with opaque centralized control from “foremen”, individuals who rely on their infor-
mal personal reputation in the community and charge roughly d% commission for
managing the fund. The principles of transparent decentralized underwriting, using
the scheme we present below, has the potential to make such chit fund schemes more
efficient and secure.
A basic chit fund example is as follows. Suppose c:: people agree to invest m9:
in the fund every month for c:: months. Each month an auction takes place, where
the members can bid to receive a fraction of the current total chit fund. The lowest
bid wins. Once you win an auction, you can’t win another, but you are still required to
add your m9: each month until the end.
The idea is that m9::: enters each month for c:: months. For m9: entry you can
withdraw almost m9::: in the first few months, if you bid lowest. If you wait longer,
the early bids will typically be lower than m9:::, so the fund will hold more than
m9::: and will continue to grow as fewer people can bid each month. Early with-
drawal is like taking a loan that is repaid for c:: months with interest, later withdrawal
is like a bank deposit that earns interest.
WebT technology can greatly improve the efficiency and security of the scheme.
First, smart contracts replace the foremen and their d% commission, eliminating the
risk of a foreman absconding with the fund. Officially sanctioned chit funds are run
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

8 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
through banks, as in Kerala, India, adding overhead through regulation and audits.
Further, if they implement a reputational system, honest participation can be tracked
across many different chit funds, as people will earn reputation each time they pay
their required monthly fee. The more often they participate honestly, the larger their
reputation will grow. Then participation in larger and more complex chit funds can be
dependent on reputation, which will incentivize healthy collaboration. It will come as
no surprise that one of the major overheads making this scheme less efficient is mem-
bers defaulting on paying the premia. It’s been estimated that Td% of chit fund sub-
scribers have defaulted at least once recently and 9e% have defaulted after winning
an auction.2
All things being equal, larger groups dilute the risk of individual default. A chit
fund with a large number of people with high reputation can pay small premia for
insurance. c million people investing mc daily for d: years allows d: people per day to
immediately begin taking an average payout of roughly m9:,:::. More investors in-
vesting smaller amounts in shorter increments, means more people can withdraw at
any point. By monitoring and analyzing the performance of a fund, programs can sug-
gest values that can be withdrawn at any given time. By automatically bidding when
the fund rises above expected levels, the fund can be stabilized to give predictable
returns—especially if multiple funds are connected.
With no initial reserve backing, this allows people to bootstrap their way to
greater financial security and stability, assuming the reputation system is sufficiently
strong to guarantee a low percentage of defaults. Further efficiency improving mech-
anisms are mentioned below, when we discuss a more general architecture for under-
writing.
Like other overhead costs (the appeals process, policing, etc.), insurance is
cheaper when the system is running well. The more automated the decentralized
economy becomes, e.g., with code-is-law smart contracts, the less insurance is re-
quired. The purpose of insurance is to decentralize risk. Ideally the risk would be de-
centralized perfectly and then the need for insuring individual transactions would dis-
appear. Given that no system will ever be perfect, insurance will always be essential.
But by implementing the new tools of information technology and the new architec-
tures of P9P distributed computing, we can create more effectively decentralized or-
ganizations. Decentralizing risk makes insurance more stable and efficient, which im-
proves the economy.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
2 Preethi Rao, Sharan Buteau, “Modelling credit and savings behaviour of chit fund participants”, Gates
Open Research, @: @< (@N>)).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 9
Decentralized architecture
The following model for the Underwriting DAO3 consists of a network of under-
writers, who roughly correspond to the shareholders of an insurance company. These
underwriters each hold a certain number of reputation tokens in the DAO which cor-
respond to their experience and skill as insurance agents. An agent’s reputation tokens
are likely to increase over time only if the agent follows sound and successful under-
writing practices.
The inductive argument for building a reputation architecture gives us insights on
what is necessary to create an Underwriting DAO. How do we create the proper in-
centives for organizing a group competing to gain money? How do we develop a leg-
islative governance process to continuously improve standards to protect an organi-
zation from gaming and corruption and innovate in response to new market threats
and opportunities? Can we do this while preventing the competitive forces from nat-
urally centralizing the system?
Again, secure and meaningful reputation is key. Reputation needs to be grounded
to be meaningful, so reputation tokens should only be minted when fees (policy
premia) enter the group. Reputation should dictate power in the group. So, reputation
should determine how the fees are shared, through reputation-weighted salaries. And
reputation should be staked in reputation-weighted democratic validation pools to
transparently establish consensus within the DAO, to police every member’s contribu-
tions, to settle debates on new protocols.
Reputation tokens serve multiple purposes:
Reputation determines membership. Only token holders are allowed to partici-
pate in underwriting insurance policies. Policies may be underwritten either singly or
jointly by these agents. New business is attracted by token holders’ sales initiative, or
else it is attracted by the fame of the DAO—in which case underwriters can be ran-
domly assigned based on reputation weight, or members can bid on the policy, etc.
Reputation-weighted salaries. Tokens serve as claims on the future cash flows
generated by the DAO. Insurance premia collected by the DAO are distributed among
the token holders in proportion to their token holdings. It is worth emphasizing that
the premium from a policy is not considered the revenue solely of the underwriters.
Instead, premia are treated as the revenue of the entire DAO and shared among the
DAO participants. Thus, the value of the tokens is a function of the expected future
cash flows of the DAO.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
3 Craig Calcaterra, Wulf A. Kaal, Vadhindran K. Rao, “Decentralized Underwriting”, May VN, @N>?. Avail-
able at https://papers.ssrn.com/solV/papers.cfm?abstract_id=VV?<]^@ (Retrieved </VN/@N)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

10 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
Underwriting builds reputation. Agents who underwrite policies by staking their
reputation tokens are rewarded with a certain number of newly minted reputation
tokens (as discussed in Chapters e and [, the amount of reward depends on the cur-
rent goals of the DAO). Thus, the total number of tokens grows over time. This implies
that “passive” agents who hold the tokens purely to receive a share of future premia
will find their proportional ownership in the DAO decrease over time. Their income
may however still increase if the overall revenues of the DAO grow at a sufficiently
increasing pace. Therefore, the effect of the design is to incentivize agents to play an
active role by participating in underwriting activities and thereby grow the business,
while still allowing passive investors to derive income and speculate on growth.
Reputation collateralized against risk. Underwriters "stake" or “encumber” an ap-
propriate number of tokens against each policy they underwrite. These tokens in ef-
fect serve to secure the promises of the underwriters. The number of tokens to be
encumbered is based on a preset formula with the objective of ensuring that the value
of the encumbered tokens is sufficient to meet any claims that may arise at any point
in the life of the policy. Such encumbered tokens continue to remain under the own-
ership of the respective agents and entitle the owners to receive their share of future
premia. In case there is no claim on the policy, the tokens are "freed up" or become
"unencumbered" when the policy matures. In case the insured event were to occur
during the life of the policy, the agents who underwrote the policy would lose control
of their encumbered tokens, which would be sold at auction to meet the claim. If the
auction does not result in sufficient currency to meet the claim, sufficient new tokens
are minted and sold to satisfy the claim. All current DAO participants (especially the
policy writer) as well as outsiders interested in joining the DAO may bid for the tokens
in this auction.
To initiate the Underwriting DAO, to prime the pump, the first reputation tokens
would be minted and distributed to members who encumbered money in a smart con-
tract analogous to the capital holdings of an insurance company. Once the DAO is run-
ning at equilibrium, with numerous policies bringing in regular premia, the reputation
tokens will gain measurable value as measured by the market, and the capital reserve
holdings can be diminished or eliminated.
We would consider the need to mint more reputation tokens to meet a policy
claim to be a breach. Under what circumstances would a breach occur? It would occur
only if the market values the encumbered reputation tokens as less than the payout.
This would happen under two broad scenarios. First, the DAO might accept a general
practice allowing agents to write policies with less than full backing, to attract more
profits from premia while sharing the risk. Then the whole DAO shares the risk that
their reputation tokens will diminish in value because more tokens are minted. This
would necessitate more strict protocols for the types of policies the Underwriting DAO
writes, and careful policing of which customers were accepted. In addition, if the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 11
DAO’s protocols require all policies to be fully backed, the only reason for a breach
would be because the reputation tokens’ initial valuation diminished before the pay-
out. In general, our models suggest this will happen only if there is a dramatic shift in
the future prospects of the DAO, such as a sharp decrease in expected future revenues
or a sharp increase in expected payments on outstanding policies.
The Underwriting DAO structure can be used by traditional insurance companies
as well as niche players specializing in a narrow range of specialty policies. A block-
chain-based DAO has the potential to take mutualization of risk to a whole new level
of aggregation and efficiency. One may even speculate on the possibility of a non-
profit version that insures its members against various specified risks. Possible exam-
ples range from device protection for individuals to long-term-care insurance for re-
tirees to health insurance for an entire country.
By decentralizing risk, insurers as well as consumers can enjoy the benefits of
transparency, efficiency, and greater stability. An underwriting DAO not only has the
potential to lower capital requirements for insurance, but also to broaden and deepen
the market for such capital as any individual or corporate entity can participate in the
DAO. The particular design outlined above facilitates the entry of new players to the
insurance market. Such participants could buy tokens when they come up for auction,
and then use these tokens to participate in underwriting, or else just hold the tokens
as a passive investment. Decentralization empowers knowledge at the edge. Individ-
uals with more fine-grained information about their neighbors and community can
make better underwriting decisions than a centralized hierarchy can. This diversifica-
tion decentralizes the market, making it more liquid, more efficient, and more profit-
able.
The design allows for collaboration among DAO underwriters as well as between
underwriters and consumers. The need to trust is minimized by appropriately de-
signed economic incentives, which allows pseudonymous participation, thanks to the
greater value of meaningful, auditable reputation. The governance rules of the DAO
can be set up so as to ensure that minority token holders are appropriately protected.
The rules can ensure that the proportion of policies written by an agent in the long
run is commensurate with the proportion of the agent's token holdings.
Bad business decisions by one underwriter need not impact the other underwrit-
ers or the DAO. If a certain underwriter makes the mistake of underestimating the risk
of the insured event, the losses will be suffered purely by the underwriter as long as
the value of the staked or encumbered tokens covers the claim. Policing this quantity
of encumbered tokens is the responsibility of the entire DAO. All members of the DAO
are incentivized to develop successful protocols through good governance in order to
protect the value of their reputation, which is continually revalued each time a claim
occurs and the market determines the price of a reputation token. As far as consumers
are concerned, potential claims are fully backed or secured by the entire DAO.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

12 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
In the case of traditional insurance companies, whether the company is solvent
and can meet its obligations depends on the safety and soundness of its investments;
whereas in the case of a DAO, this depends only on the safety and soundness of the
DAO itself. The advantage of a blockchain-based system is that the latter information
would be transparently auditable by everyone.
In this decentralized system, the tokens essentially substitute for reputation. Even
if the underwriters of a particular policy were to breach the contract, the auction of
the encumbered tokens and the sale of additional tokens as needed, ensures that the
policy holder's claim is fully met. Thus, what we are referring to as a breach on a par-
ticular insurance contract does not necessarily imply any losses for the consumer as
long as the entire DAO is more valuable than the individual customer’s claim. A breach
leads to no losses for other members of the DAO, as long as the encumbered tokens
match the payout of the claim.
The structure of incentives embedded in this design has the potential to substan-
tially lower capital requirements and the related need for capital regulation in the in-
surance industry. We note that the burden of maintaining sufficient liquidity in order
to meet claims is not on the DAO, but rather is distributed amongst the individual
underwriters that make up the DAO. Each underwriter would of course need to main-
tain sufficient liquidity and economic capital in order to be able to reclaim tokens as
and when claims occur. However, it is possible under certain conditions that the total
amount of capital that these agents will collectively hold is lower under this design
than if the burden of meeting the liability were to be on a traditional insurance firm
which has more centralized risk.
This result is based on the premise that the amount of capital each underwriter
will hold will be based on the risk of the underwriter's overall portfolio. The overall
portfolio of an individual underwriter, especially a non-traditional one, may benefit
from the addition of underwriting due to diversification, as attested to some extent
by the existence of insurance-linked securities such as catastrophe bonds.
As a result, the sum of the incremental VaRs (Value at Risk amounts) of the indi-
vidual underwriters may be less than the VaR of an insurance firm that has underwrit-
ten the same contracts. More importantly, how much capital an underwriter holds is
a matter of their personal risk preference. An underwriter who is willing to tolerate
fluctuations in their token holdings need only provide for expected losses. The key
point is this: from the viewpoint of consumers and regulators, the encumbered tokens
(which as we know derive their value from the DAO's future cash flows) essentially
serve as a substitute for capital. Financial distress or bankruptcy of an individual un-
derwriter does not have to affect either consumers or the DAO. As mentioned previ-
ously, in case of a breach on a particular contract, the policy holder’s claim can still be
met by an auction of the encumbered tokens. Additional resources if required can be
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 13
raised by minting new tokens. Barring highly adverse market conditions, the availabil-
ity of "capital on tap" protects the DAO from default and bankruptcy. Thus, the design
has the potential to greatly simplify capital regulation.
In sum, the larger the network of Underwriting DAO members, the more distrib-
uted and decentralized the risk can be spread, making the system more efficient and
stable. This makes the economy more predictable, efficient, and prosperous.
Trading markets
“From the time I first understood economic principles, I was always concerned
also that any system be operated on an efficient basis, which meant decentralization
because knowledge is not concentrated anywhere. It's based on motivation, and so
these are […] the cautious case for capitalism, that the market system is efficient.”
–Kenneth Arrow, Interview with the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
December c, cvvd.4
General principles
Decentralization and bureaucratic transparency are essential to the efficient op-
eration of marketplaces.
The liquidity of a market depends on how quickly its assets can be sold and how
much prices change when they are sold. A market’s depth is how much can be bought
and sold at any given moment. A market can only remain liquid under various condi-
tions if it is also deep. The efficiency of price discovery characterizes a market’s liquid-
ity. Liquid markets are more efficient and stable. Business on a liquid market is less
risky and more profitable.
All things being equal, larger, decentralized, transparent markets are more effi-
cient. The larger the market, the deeper it is, and the more liquid it becomes. Second,
the more autonomous the members of the market are, the more they will have diver-
gent interests and desires, which improves the market’s liquidity. Concentration of
power (especially monopolies or trusts) decreases liquidity; decentralization of power
improves liquidity. Another obvious disadvantage of a centralized market is the over-
head that a central authority charges; in a decentralized market the members police
themselves. Third, the more transparent the statistics of the market’s transactions is,
the better it is for price discovery, which improves the market’s liquidity. The more
(cid:0)(cid:0)
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/>??]/interview-with-kenneth-arrow (Retrieved </@V/@N).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

14 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
liquid a market is, the more transparent it is, the more open it is, the closer it becomes
to what is technically called “perfect”.
Therefore, markets become more efficient, more profitable, and less risky when
they achieve greater power decentralization, greater transparency, and more open
membership. The foundational values of WebT are the basic principles that improve
an economy.
However, greater transparency is at odds with more open membership, because
larger networks are only achieved when privacy is ensured. Privacy and power over
your own personal information need to be prime values for development, but this is
generally achieved at the expense of transparency and efficient price discovery. Fur-
ther, anonymity is a threat to many market schemes, such as the chit fund example
discussed above. Reputation and sophisticated ZK proof protocols can help to address
this problem. Pseudonymous wallets held by private keys can encumber reputation
tokens in such a way that they are staked and can be automatically slashed if violations
are provably committed. Statistics on transactions can be revealed with ZK proofs
without revealing information from the individual transactions.
WebT has achieved the technology required to build liquid decentralized markets,
with smart contracts and cryptography. The basic idea is to have a network engaging
smart contracts with offers to sell at different prices and buy at different prices. When-
ever there are two smart contracts that cross (buyer offering higher than the seller is
offering) then the next block producer combines the contracts and completes them in
the block, and collects the difference. Those differences are the reward for maintain-
ing the network, shared with everyone owning reputation tokens. These smart con-
tracts can be active as long as required before a coincidence of wants is found. The
owners can put limits on their validity, so they self-destruct after a short, set time,
then update the contract as they observe the market.
The decentralized market is the most efficient mechanism for price discovery.
Price discovery determines the price of an asset but also the ideal quantity the econ-
omy needs and the ideal levels and types of services the economy needs. The market
finds the right equilibrium between all the industries and companies to determine
how much of each work and good is required to keep civilization running efficiently.
The basic financial markets
The basic financial assets are currencies (foreign exchange, or Forex), commodi-
ties, equities, securities, and derivatives.
We discussed decentralized Forex above with DEXs (peer-to-peer decentralized
cryptocurrency exchanges), such as the :x protocol, MakerDAO’s smart contract,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 15
Plasma on Ethereum, and the Lightning Network on Bitcoin. Many other protocols are
competing to take part in the crypto economy. DEXs epitomize market decentraliza-
tion because they allow users to interact and trade anonymously in a secure environ-
ment without the need for third party intermediation.
In a DEX, proprietary trading intermediaries, such as market makers and central-
ized third-party operators, cannot inject themselves in a transaction. As a result, con-
flicts and counterparty risks are ab-sent in a DEX. Moreover, the fee structure in a DEX
is different from a centralized cryptocurrency exchange, which typically charges a per-
cent of the total value of the transaction. Instead, on a DEX, the users pay a fee as gas
(Ethereum’s fee for motivating the network’s nodes to add your transaction), more
akin to a per-trade fee, which is a fraction of the percentage charged per transaction
on centralized cryptocurrency exchanges. Because a DEX does not centralize authority
over users’ assets, users can sign and start trading anonymously, that is, without iden-
tity verification. Centralized cryptocurrency exchanges struggle keeping up with know-
your-customer and anti-money laundering rules. Nevertheless, most DEXs have been
struggling with liquidity and price discovery.
Orders on a DEX are matched and settled through the operational rules provided
by the code. Unlike central order books on centralized exchanges and the settlement
back office that facilitates the finalization of a trade, on a DEX, the code facilitates the
peer-to-peer exchange without the involvement of any intermediary.
Despite many of the benefits that derive from its decentralized exchange model,
DEXs may not be able to ensure market integrity. Just like centralized cryptocurrency
exchanges provide certain traders with benefits that may provide them with ad-
vantages at the expense of other traders, the code that creates a DEX may also allow
the asymmetric distribution of trading information based on user status.5 The code
may also create new risks to market integrity because of its automation and lack of a
human backstop in compliance, back office, and settlement. Wash trading, frontrun-
ning, and insider trading are risks to market integrity that can materialize on a DEX,
among other price-manipulation practices. Again, regulation and governance are cru-
cial to the future of the decentralized economy.
The next assets to consider are commodities. To make decentralized commodities
markets, the key is tokenization. This was explained above, where we argued under-
writing is necessary to give tokenized commodities and properties meaning and value.
Tokenization is technologically achievable on Ethereum with standard ERC-9: and
ERC-h9c tokens. But such tokens don’t hold value without secure reputation and trans-
parent history.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
5 Barbara Underwood, “Virtual Markets: Integrity Report”, Office of the New York State Attorney Gen-
eral, (Sept. >), @N>)) https://virtualmarkets.ag.ny.gov/ (accessed June >, @N@N).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

16 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
The next assets to analyze are equities. An equity is a token of ownership in a
company, such as a stock. ICOs, as introduced by Ethereum, prove we have the tech-
nological tools to cheaply create and sell decentralized stocks in a company, called
ERC-9:6 tokens. These tokens can give their owners more practical powers than tra-
ditional stocks. Due to their smart contract functionality, any imaginable business
transaction can be programmed, with the token being used as proof of ownership.
The ICO market peaked from March 9:c) to June 9:c). The percentage of ICOs
in relation to total fundraising of blockchain startups dropped from ):% to around
Td% in August 9:c) and only marginally recovered between September 9:c) and Feb-
ruary 9:cv at around e:% to d:% before dropping to 9:% in March 9:cv. From March
9:ch to June 9:c), ICOs were the overwhelmingly dominant fundraising tool for the
blockchain industry. The demise of the ICO market turned the overall trend away from
ICO funding to traditional venture funding in the blockchain industry.
The emergence of the ICO market changed the market for venture funding. In the
traditional venture capital model, venture capital funds invest significant amounts of
money in the hope of finding the next unicorn start-up. This investment process is
subject to long, complex, and time intensive processes leading up to a late liquidity
event in the form of an IPO or acquisition. By contrast, ICOs provide liquidity to inves-
tors much faster and allow venture capital funds to capitalize on existing profits early.
Venture capital funds who invest in crypto start-ups gain access to much earlier liquid-
ity via ICOs by converting their cryptocurrency profits into Bitcoin or Ether through
any of the cryptocurrency exchanges and can thereafter transfer into fiat currencies
via online services such as Coins-Bank or Coinbase. During the ICO boom years, the
venture capital market in the decentralized technology sector ground to a halt. In the
aftermath of the ICO boom and collapse, traditional venture funding has become,
again, the predominant model for funding blockchain startups.
Market decentralization via ICOs and other decentralized funding methods has
significant disruptive effects on finance. ICOs provide lower barriers to entry for a
more diverse body of investors and thus increase the diversity and the heterogeneity
of start-up funding. Through borderless online sales, ICOs are directly marketed to a
worldwide potential pool of investors, bypassing the typical legal, jurisdictional, and
business hurdles in traditional venture capital financing. Moreover, ICOs benefit from
limited accreditation standards, as well as from multiple global cryptocurrency ex-
(cid:0)(cid:0)
6 Ethereum has a primitive governance system for coordinating updates its codebase. One element is
their public ERC proposals. ERC stands for Ethereum Request for Comment, and @N is the proposal
identifier.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 17
changes that provide continuous access to trading. ICO promoters and their develop-
ers are not forced to sacrifice their equity in the project in exchange for the funds they
raised.
The next type of financial market to consider is securities, which are other finan-
cial instruments that make some guarantee to pay off money in the future, such as
bonds or annuities. Smart contracting allows us to create decentralized transparently
auditable securities with extremely complex business logic.
The final type of asset is a derivative. They are called this because they are second-
order contracts, such as options, which give people the right to buy (a “call”) or sell (a
“put”) another financial asset in the future. By managing risk, futures stabilize the mar-
ket, improving its liquidity and efficiency. Traditional markets hold perhaps USmc quad-
rillion in derivatives. Therefore, this is a rather important target for deFi development.
There is a great multiplicity of possible traditional futures contracts that use compli-
cated business logic, so it would seem to be the ideal application for self-executing
smart contracts. However, there is not much liquidity in decentralized derivative ex-
changes. At three years old, and functional for much less than that, the Augur DAO is
one of the older decentralized options. There are other protocols, such as Opyn on the
Uniswap DEX.
At the time of writing, the market for decentralized options is extremely shal-
low—especially considering how turbulent the other decentralized financial asset
markets are. The problem, again, is reputation. In order to guarantee liquidity, some-
one who wishes to sell a call option is required to actually own the asset, since there
is unlimited potential for growth. In other words, the inability to trust the platform or
the anonymous users requires these decentralized derivatives to be capitalized at
least c::%, which would be impossibly onerous in traditional markets. We will discuss
this problem again, below, as a major flaw in today’s stable coins, and again suggest
the solution demands more sophisticated reputation and history.
Regulation
The anarchist and libertarian philosophy that informs most WebT developers’
public pronouncements has led to an antiregulation fervor that is damaging the po-
tential for widespread adoption of decentralized P9P tools.
Securities commissions in every major market (such as the SEC in the US, the
ECMS in the EU, and the CSRC in the PRC) were ostensibly created to protect investors
from patterns of bad business that naturally arise when creating and trading equities
and other assets. However, these centralized bureaucracies are slow to update their
regulations, which means these regulations often hurt the very people they were de-
signed to help. The average citizen is not capable of benefitting from the power of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

18 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
many financial derivatives, for example, because safeguards from the SEC require mil-
lion-dollar outlays. But the SEC provides many systems which improve the market and
protect basic consumers, which the crypto economy is currently lacking.
The charge of every securities commission in every major nation is to protect the
average small investor from predatory groups, by ensuring transparency and good ac-
counting and business practices. As such they have a duty, both professional and
moral, to do everything in their power to prevent WebT technologies which are used
for rent-seeking, insider trading, and outright digital theft. Bitcoin.com has estimated
that more than USmT billion worth of cryptocurrency was stolen in 9:c) alone.7 Much
of this was never retrieved because the regulatory agencies are not up to date on the
new technology.
At the same time any project that matches or exceeds traditional standards for
transparency in accounting and good business practices should be encouraged. Truly
decentralized projects which surpass traditional regulatory standards have the poten-
tial for improving our economy and revitalizing our society. Any nation that stifles in-
novation that improves the status of its citizens and increases their opportunities
doesn’t deserve the mandate of governance it is given by its people. If it doesn’t up-
date to match the challenge of these new technologies and architectures, the SEC will
no longer be deserving of its charge.
Standards for transparency and external audits of equities should be natural ad-
ditions to the decentralized economy, and WebT developers should welcome them.
Open source protections for consumers gives individuals more power, making them
more autonomous, making the network more decentralized.
It is, however, not possible to create a centralized organization, such as the SEC,
for regulating the decentralized economy. Submitting to such regulatory power would
place the supranational decentralized market under competing jurisdictions which
naturally have contradictory regulations. Submitting to centralized regulatory control
limits the network to members from a single jurisdiction, which would limit the net-
work effect, making the market less liquid, less efficient, and less profitable.
Dynamic standards under decentralized control is necessary. Both the SEC and
WebT need to change. Again, effective decentralized governance and a genuine bu-
reaucratic transparency are crucial.
Stablecoins
“All money is a matter of belief.” –Adam Smith
(cid:0)(cid:0)
7 https://news.bitcoin.com/?-million-day-lost-cryptocurrency-scams/ (Retrieved July @N, @N@N.)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 19
What is a stablecoin? What makes them crucial for the decentralized economy?
How are they built? What is missing?
A stablecoin is a cryptocurrency token from a blockchain which is designed to
maintain its value, instead of rising and falling under temporary market changes. Sta-
blecoins distinguish themselves from other digital money, like bitcoin and ether,
whose value fluctuates strongly in response to changes in market demand, switching
between the need for cash or investments.
Stability is an obsession in this book. Stable motion, liquidity, is the most efficient
state of the economy. A liquid market rapidly matches the “coincidences of wants”
necessary to form business deals, so people can cooperate and trade to meet their
needs and desires. Stability is necessary to make good predictions so that your invest-
ments in the future are more successful.
A currency which maintains a stable store of value is more efficient for an econ-
omy than one which does not. The US dollar (similar to every other national fiat cur-
rency) is managed by the US Federal Reserve in order to maintain a steady and pre-
dictable value in the long run. Since 9::9, their stated target is 9% annual inflation.
The value of a dollar is determined by comparing what a basket of goods costs, year
to year, in many different locations. The “basket of goods” are typically commodities,
such as oil or minerals or grains, which have a relatively constant supply and demand.
Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies are extremely volatile compared with almost
every form of national fiat currency. This is natural, since the value of cryptocurrencies
is almost entirely due to speculation on their future usefulness in the currently non-
existent decentralized economy. If bitcoin ever does become widely adopted and
used, however, its price will likely not completely stabilize. The total quantity of
Bitcoin is capped at 9c million tokens. This means, like gold, its value will change de-
pending on the market demand. The demand will change whenever the trends change
for people’s economic behavior. More use of the currency, through more transactions,
and more savings, generally increase the demand for the currency, which raises its
value, due to its scarcity.
Currency with price volatility on the order of gold, is not a good choice for a cur-
rency. Without stablecoins, typical consumers should never hold their checking ac-
count in the currency. No one should ever make a long-term contract for any essential
service in bitcoin. Neither the renter nor the landlord should sign a contract if its value
might halve or double in any given month. Renegotiating contracts each time the value
of a currency changes is inefficient, and continually punishes one of the parties. The
economy should not be founded on gambling, so any future decentralized economy
requires stable cryptocurrencies.
Since their inception in 9:ce with Tether, stable cryptocurrencies have primarily
been used as a cash equivalent for cryptocurrency portfolios. They are used as a safe
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

20 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
harbor to weather the volatility in digital assets. By 9:cv, stable cryptocurrencies grew
substantially in popularity as an answer to the high volatility associated with the cryp-
tocurrency markets. Depending on their design, they can offer additional features,
such as transparency, privacy, and increased decentralization. Stable cryptocurrencies
can also offer lower fees and faster transaction speeds, making them rather useful for
international transactions and everyday payments.
However, today’s cryptocurrencies are still in their infancy, and offer very few of
these features. The largest stablecoin platform is Tether (USDT) which pegs its value
to the US dollar. As of June, 9:9:, Tether holds )d% of the c: billion USD market share
of stablecoins.
In 9:ce, Robert Sams introduced the first attempt at creating a stability mecha-
nism for cryptocurrencies.8 In 9:9:, the leading notable stable cryptocurrency
startups and their respective approaches include: Tether, Coinbase, MakerDAO’s DAI,
and many, many others. They all naturally have flaws, but give useful tools for today’s
crypto speculators. We criticize their design and identify areas for improvement in this
section.
Basic Design
Design architectures fall into two broad categories, e.g. collateralized and uncol-
lateralized mechanisms. Both are subject to downsides. Collateralized projects use ei-
ther fiat currencies or cryptocurrencies as reserve backing. The function of the collat-
eral is as follows.
Imagine a stablecoin DAO which mints a cryptocurrency token and pegs its value
to the USD. The idea is that the token can be sold in a public exchange, and the value
is kept at c token for mc. Whenever the price of the token goes up, the smart-contract-
automated mechanism mints more of the tokens and sells them on the exchange. This
brings the price down to mc. Whenever the price drops below mc, the algorithm buys
tokens on the exchange and deletes (“burns”) them, which raises their price back to
mc, according to the Quantity Theory of Money.
Fundamental to this scheme is that the DAO needs to hold a reserve of foreign
assets, collateral, such as fiat currencies (dollars, euros, yen, …) or cryptocurrencies
(cid:0)(cid:0)
8 Robert Sams, A Note on Cryptocurrency Stabilisation: Seigniorage Shares, BRAVE
NEWCOIN (Apr. 28, 2015),
https://assets.ctfassets.net/sdlntm3tthp6/resource-as-
setr390/5a940afb21681d19c0b3b76cf69259e1/58ebe9e2-1f28-4a8d-8ce1-
26abef07aedf.pdf.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 21
(bitcoin, ether, …). This collateral is sold when the price is low, and is bought with the
newly minted tokens when the price of the tokens is high. When running properly, this
mechanism actually makes money while maintaining the stablecoin’s stability.
Unfortunately, fiat currency collateralization is expensive and inefficient, and no
stablecoin can currently compete with traditional currencies and services. The basic
problem is that the reserve is expensive to maintain. Because of the threat of the Soros
attack, all of the major cryptocurrency platforms have publicly committed to main-
taining reserves which back their coins c::%. If there are mc billion worth of coins in
the public, they promise to maintain a reserve equivalent to mc billion US in some bank.
To see why this is necessary let’s discuss the basic idea behind the Soros attack9 sim-
plified as follows.
Imagine the Bank of England institutes a policy of maintaining a peg of one British
pound artificially high, equal to m9. But the market sees the true value as mc per pound.
The Bank of England maintains a reserve of foreign currency worth mc: billion to keep
the peg at m9 to c pound. Under these conditions George Soros would arbitrage the
system as follows:
Take out a loan for mc: billion in pounds.
Sell mc: billion of the pounds at mc.vv per pound. So that the bank of England pays
George almost mc: billion to maintain the peg at m9.
Now the reserve is depleted, the Bank of England cannot defend its artificial peg,
so the market drops to its genuine valuation of the pound at mc.
Now that the peg is broken, George repurchases the pounds at mc which is half
what he was paid for them, so he only pays md billion.
George repays the loan and pockets the md billion difference.
The lesson of the Soros attack, is that if the value of a cryptocurrency is pegged at
a value higher than its true market value, the difference must be backed c::% by a
foreign reserve of collateral holdings. Otherwise financiers can make money breaking
the stablecoin’s peg.
As an indictment of the stablecoin developers’ faith in their own product, every
major stablecoin publicly claims their tokens are backed at least c::%. This means
they think their coins’ fundamental value is m:. We don’t entirely agree. But given the
(cid:0)(cid:0)
9 The Soros Attack is named after investor George Soros because of his role in Black Wednesday, which
occurred September ><, >??@. Soros believed the British pound sterling was overvalued based partly
on low interest rates and high inflation and so built a large short position and initiated the attack
described in this section. The British government failed to maintain its peg and was forced to withdraw
from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism. The British government lost over gV.V billion sterling,
while Soros profited more than g> billion.
Matthew Tempest, “Treasury papers reveal cost of Black Wednesday”, The Guardian, London, UK (?
February @NN])
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

22 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
instability of the cryptocurrency market, and the lack of fundamental features such as
decentralized governance, we don’t entirely disagree.
The maintenance of a c::% reserve is too expensive to be efficient, and signals
the need for more sophisticated mechanisms. All of the value in the reserve which
backs the cryptocurrency needs to be liquid, otherwise arbitrage opportunities, such
as the Soros attack, are possible—especially with an algorithmic stable coin. Whatever
value is held liquid in the reserve, costs its users due to the loss of opportunity to
invest the money. The price tag of fiat-backed tokens is, at a minimum, the interest
rate of the pegged fiat currency and the cost to maintain the platform. As long as the
market is so unstable, platforms can profit from the buy low, sell high mechanism
mentioned above.
Cryptocurrency-backed tokens are even more expensive than fiat backed tokens,
because the stability is achieved with much more unstable cryptocurrencies. Any cryp-
tocurrency-backed token must be backed with much more than c::% of the current
value of the cryptocurrency in case the basket of other crypto currencies’ value drops.
For example, in MakerDAO, if a token is backed by ether, and the value of ether drops
by half at any moment, then the automated scheme will punish anyone who has not
backed their tokens by more than 9::%. Given how unstable the market is, users need
to back their tokens by even more, or risk automated punishment.
Hot money
On the contrary, we argue that a c::% reserve is not always necessary, as is the
case with any currency which has an intrinsic worth. At minimum, e.g., a national cur-
rency has the intrinsic worth represented by the confidence gained from the ability to
pay taxes. But the amount of value represented by the currency also contributes to its
intrinsic worth. For example, the amount of money invested in company shares, an-
nuities, insurance, and property all contribute to the value that is authentically deter-
mining the total value the currency intrinsically represents.
A cryptocurrency can be measured to have intrinsic worth if there are similar au-
thentic business transactions that rely on its tokens. Authentic transactions are distin-
guished from hot money. Hot money is money which is being used on second-order
investments, such as speculating on the market. It is hot, because it can immediately
exit the system, for example if it is exchanged for a foreign currency. It’s easier to
distinguish between authentic and hot money transactions for typical cryptocurrency
transactions than traditional business, since transparency makes them more easily au-
ditable.
Soros was not able to break the Bank of England because it wasn’t fully backed
with foreign reserves, but because the British pound was being pegged at a value that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 23
was inauthentic. In fact no nation holds anything near to a c::% reserve for the obvi-
ous reason that it would be too expensive to have a large liquid reserve. The US foreign
reserve, e.g., is less than 9% of its money. Holding any liquid reserve is a loss of oppor-
tunity cost that is a type of economic friction its users must subsidize, explicitly in
transaction taxes which transparently pay for maintenance of the peg, or implicitly in
holding taxes which bearers of the currency pay, usually through inflation.
Therefore, determining the fraction of a currency that is hot money is necessary
for efficient defense of its stability. A currency that overestimates this hot money ratio
will cost more to use. A currency that underestimates the ratio will be insecure. The
tension between these two values of efficiency and security motivates a careful esti-
mate of the hot money ratio. This means a sophisticated decentralized governance
system is crucial for any efficient stablecoin.
Today, we estimate that a majority of all cryptocurrency is used for speculation.
It’s virtually all hot money. Worse, these open source platforms can be cloned and
replaced by competitors within minutes. So their fundamental value is questiona-
ble.10 Therefore, it needs to be backed fully or risk collapse. We need a robust decen-
tralized economy before a stablecoin can reduce its collateralization. We need an ef-
ficient and useful stablecoin before we can build a robust decentralized economy. This
is another of the many chicken-and-egg problems that hamper the adoption of new
systems.
Stablecoin design choices
Here we briefly discuss how to build a stablecoin.11 The quantity theory of money
dictates how you can stabilize the value of a token by minting new tokens to drop the
price and burning tokens to raise the price. Theoretically, all things being equal (which
is never accurate in practice), if the economy has twice as many tokens available,
prices should be twice as high. If there are half as many tokens in an imagined mirror
economy, the price of goods would be half as much.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
10 On the other hand, a major source of stability of a decentralized organization comes from the au-
tonomy of its members. This makes it extremely unlikely for them to all do one thing and exit en masse.
This means the more decentralized the platform is, and the larger and older the platform is, the more
intrinsic worth it will have, and the less it will be hot money. No stable coin should be backed >NN%.
And a well-designed stablecoin should anticipate the future when it is used for more authentic eco-
nomic activity, and can drop the reserve to well below >NN%.
11 A deeper analysis can be found in Craig Calcaterra, Wulf A. Kaal, & Vadhindran K. Rao, “Stable Cryp-
tocurrencies: First Order Principles”, Stanford Journal of Blockchain Law & Policy, Vol. V, No. >, (@N@N)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

24 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
Reserves and bonds can be used to burn tokens and raise the price. The bond
mechanism is to mint and sell bonds at auction for the stable coin; the stable coins
earned through the sale are then burned raising the price of the stable coin; then the
bonds are redeemed for newly minted stable coins at some later date. The reserve
mechanism is the same as described above with the Soros attack. Reserves should be
used to defend the peg against hot money short-term fluctuations. Bonds should only
be used when the larger economy is experiencing longer-term changes, when one of
the Four Horsemen visits.
To maintain the network’s operation, the price should be borne by transaction
fees. To stabilize the value due to inefficiencies in the economy (spoilage, overhead,
other frictions/corruption), holding taxes should be used. Holding taxes means the
currency’s inflation rate. I.e., if you hold the money for a year, the inflation rate tells
you how much value you lose. Inflation is controlled by dictating how the peg of value
changes.
Finally, if the economy has a fundamental change, the currency should be
repegged. A fundamental change may include a black swan event that makes the mar-
ket reevaluate the value of the economy. Trying to maintain a peg at an artificial level
prevents new members from adopting the currency and punishes members as they
need to pay to maintain the artificial valuation. Maintaining the artificial valuation is
the most likely way to induce a death spiral which collapses a currency.
Most importantly, good governance principles are crucial for every aspect of in-
stituting any long-term stablecoin due to inevitable changes in the market and the
fundamental obstacle represented by the Folk Theorems of Game Theory. How does
the stablecoin DAO determine when and how to adjust the parameters of the stability
algorithm to react to market changes? How do we know whether a change in price is
due to hot money or more fundamental factors? What type of assets should be main-
tained in the reserves. To address these problems, we need decentralized central
banking systems. The long-term governance of the DAO requires the best expertise to
keep the currency stable. To find the best people to make governance decisions, re-
quires a secure and meaningful reputation system to filter that talent. Secure means
the reputation provides the right incentives and defenses to police the system and
prevent gaming. Meaningful means the reputation pays the members properly for
their expertise.
Summary
In the 9:9:s, the market for DeFi has started to take off but fully decentralized
DeFi solutions still have a long way to go. The fundamentals go both ways, predicting
deFi’s current failure and eventual success.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 25
First, the decentralized economy is missing the major institutions that our society
relies on to conduct profitable business, especially a secure and meaningful system
for evaluating reputation for anonymous supranational partners, and an effective and
dynamic governance system that we can trust will guarantee justice and predictable
continual improvement.
Second, in the opposite direction, these decentralized networks have grown past
the tipping point and are now immortal. The only way a centralized nation can control
a decentralized network within their borders is to ban it completely, like the PRC has
for many blockchains. But that will pose no threat to their existence. Like the nomadic
Apaches, or filesharing apps like BitTorrent, attacking them will only make the decen-
tralized economy stronger. In countries where it is allowed, it will thrive, making them
more economically efficient and competitive under global capitalism. Though the Peo-
ple’s Republic of China has banned its people from using current cryptocurrencies,
they have been developing several stable coins for years. The global social media gi-
ant, Facebook, has been developing its own stable coin, Libra. If successful, such initi-
atives could link the crypto economy with establishment institutions.
The comparison of new P9P projects with older projects, like BitTorrent, is instruc-
tive. BitTorrent has been the subject of intense legal scrutiny and regulation12, yet it
still exists because of its decentralized nature. However, these older P9P projects did
not receive anything close to the level of accredited academic support that the newer
blockchain projects are receiving. The technology is improving quickly, as is public and
scientific understanding. In 9:c), most voices that made it to major media outlets pro-
claimed deFi will vanish, that “crypto is the mother or father of all scams and bub-
bles.”13 In 9:9: there are more peer-reviewed articles published each day with im-
provements from accredited scientists, than there are stories criticizing the
technology. Academics have begun to take the technology seriously as a new tool for
improving peoples’ lives.
Ethereum has the most deFi investment. It is growing, but at the moment, it is still
insignificant. Only T% of ether tokens (market cap 9[ billion USD) are locked in deFi
smart contracts. The intrinsic value of cryptocurrencies will only become significant
once tokenization of commodities and other authentic uses of the money are
achieved.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
12 More than @NN,NNN lawsuits were filed in the U.S. over the use of the decentralized protocol from
@N>N to @N>>. “BitTorrent: Copyright lawyers' favourite target reaches @NN,NNN lawsuits”, The Guard-
ian, (August ?, @N>>).
13 CNBC quoting a New York University professor in a hearing with the U.S. Senate Committee on Bank-
ing, Housing and Community Affairs. (October >>, @N>)) https://www.cnbc.com/@N>)/>N/>>/roubini-
bitcoin-is-mother-of-all-scams.html (Retrieved July @), @N@N)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

26 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Finance
When will deFi take off? When the economy becomes viable—when cryptocur-
rency is used in authentic transactions such as insurance and equities in broad seg-
ments of industry and tokenization of commodities and properties is instituted. This
will happen when people can trust the systems, which will only happen when decen-
tralized reputation and governance are achieved. The technological problems are tan-
talizingly close to being solved, but so far, the inability to trust each other due to the
requirements of anonymity is crippling the deFi market. So traditional markets have a
fundamental advantage. Decentralized markets are overcollateralized. To make a de-
centralized financial transaction, such as a loan, or buy an insurance policy or a deriv-
ative instrument, someone needs to completely back the product with c::% collat-
eral. In the case of secondary layers, you need more, such as MakerDAO’s scheme
which requires much more than 9::% collateralization. This would be an unthinkable
obstacle to liquidity in traditional markets. It is only being used in the crypto space
because of a lack of decentralized alternatives.
However, once secure and meaningful reputation is incorporated into the WebT
environment, this imbalance will be reversed. Since reputation tokens are more mean-
ingful than identity, and much easier to valuate, even less collateralization will be re-
quired than traditional protocols, and the decentralized economy will gain the upper
hand over traditional centralized institutions. Locking your reputation tokens instead
of your assets would be a strong leap in efficiency, giving a powerful economic ad-
vantage over traditional finance. This can only be achieved with a coherent system
which securely tracks the value of a reputation token.
Not until the problems with decentralized governance are addressed will the de-
centralized economy be stable enough to invest fully, for the long term. These prob-
lems need to be solved before the decentralized economy can realize its full potential
for efficiency. Once they are solved, however, the crypto economy is ready to explo-
sively grow. The technical tools have been built. The legal and business dimensions
just need to be arranged to ensure security and fairness through the proper incentives.
But even with all this, there is still another basic component missing—one more
institutional overhead system that gives business the catalyst it needs. How can the
average person participate in the decentralized economy? How can they know what
is a good network to participate in? How can they know what to invest in? We need
trustworthy open source decentralized institutions for recording and parsing history,
for investigating and reporting the news, for guiding our attention to the future.
Bibliography
Formating example:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

Chapter ) – Finance (cid:0) 27
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782216

