Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
1
The Importance of Transcendental Unifying Values
for Decentralization
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
Chapter )* highlights the need for the establishment and maintenance of unifying
transcendental values of decentralized organizations. Unlike scientific laws, transcen-
dental values cannot be stated formally and explicitly. The power of a decentralized
organization derives from its ability to unite its members in service to the goal of their
shared values. The strength a decentralized network is measured by summing the
power of each member in their individual autonomy. Yet, their very autonomy re-
quires the members to construct the unifying ideals for themselves. They are individ-
ually responsible for the establishment, nourishment, and revitalization of those uni-
fying ideals, continually.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Chapter =>. Transcendental Unifying Values
“Without myth, however, every culture loses its healthy creative natural power:
it is only a horizon encompassed with myth that rounds off to unity a social move-
ment.”
― Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy
This final essential institution is the most important for long-term stability, and
demands eternal reevaluation. Decentralized organizations require strong unifying
values to remain coherent. Decentralized organizations live by their ideals.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

2 (cid:0) Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
The decentralized economy requires decentralized creeds for each DAO. Similar
to how the authors of the U.S. Constitution considered freedom of religion and speech
as the very first principle, the point of decentralization is to give individuals more au-
tonomy, to give them more freedom to choose the right path in their behavior. The
very first principle of human autonomy is freedom of thought; without it, there is no
autonomy. So despite the fact that we can witness a single global society emerging,
where everyone on the planet is connected in more intimate ways than a medieval
city was, there should not be a single power-centralized hierarchy to control it. In-
stead, the better, more efficient, more stable state of this global society is an organi-
zation that is power decentralized, giving individuals and subgroup DAOs more auton-
omous power to contribute to the health and wealth and happiness of all. Therefore,
we take for granted a multiplicity of beliefs and creeds and values in the various DAOs
that form.
In order to maintain efficiency, we must understand the answer to the question,
“Efficiency in the pursuit of what goals?” Understanding our goals is effectively the
same as understanding our values. Therefore, to maintain the system, to maintain its
efficiency, we must adhere to our values. By the insights gleaned from the Folk Theo-
rems of Game Theory, transcendental values are necessary to maintain long-term sta-
bility in the face of ever-present strategies for subverting any formal, explicitly-speci-
fied protocol.
Integrating polar values
In this chapter we analyze some transcendental values that people might use to
help unify a DAO. The point of unifying people is to bring together individuals with
different perspectives. A maximally effective set of unifying values will achieve the
seemingly impossible feat of integrating opposing values.
For instance, in order to keep a car running properly, you need to harmoniously
integrate the functions of accelerating and decelerating while you steer stably toward
your goal. Similarly, liberal and conservative values are both important to keep a soci-
ety running in the long run. Liberal values can be identified with the automobile’s ac-
celerator. Conservative values are associated with the brakes. Liberal values are con-
cerned with change and progress, improvement. Conservative principles are devoted
to preservation and protection. Walls are identified with conservative values. Eradi-
cating divisions between people, breaking down walls, is stereotypically a liberal
value. Building secure walls with well-designed doors is the proper way to embody
both values, integrating them harmoniously in your economic system. You need to
secure your system from ruin, build walls to protect your group from the Tragedy of
the Commons and malicious threats. But you also need to build doors, to revitalize
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values (cid:0) 3
your group with fresh inputs from anyone willing and able to help. W)st century WebX
doors can be programmed with dynamic rules to continually evolve to improve their
function.
To keep any society stable and healthy, history reveals three polar opposite sets
of fundamental values that need to be integrated:
Communal cooperation vs. individual freedom (information transmission; what
do we do, individually and communally)
Cooperation is the basis of human wealth and safety. But it comes at the cost of indi-
vidual agency. A harmonious balance between these values is necessary for survival,
and so is evolutionarily built into our animal nature.
Bureaucratic transparency vs. personal privacy (information storage; what do we
know, individually and communally)
Internet communication and information storage gives us the power to make all deci-
sion-making processes available to everyone concurrently. Cryptography allows us to
keep our personal information secret, allowing us to interact anonymously in even the
most sophisticated business transactions.
Equity of necessities vs. meritocracy for nonessentials (information processing;
what do material objects mean to us, individually and communally)
Equity in economic theory is the distribution of resources with the goal of making all
members equally powerful and wealthy. Meritocracy distributes power to the people
who can best use it for the benefit of the individual and the community. How does
society share essential and nonessential resources? How do we individually use essen-
tial and non-essential resources?
Each pair of values is in tension with its opposite. It is natural to imagine that
strengthening one diminishes its opposite. But that is plainly false in any complex sit-
uation.
For example, a society which is completely equitably leveled materially, crushes
its meritocratic instinct by eliminating all individual reward. Its next generation will
not be able to produce as much to share because of the inefficient allocation of power
to those who cannot use it well. It will then share less overall, diminishing its equitable
share as the years progress. This failure was repeatedly demonstrated in numerous
W*th century communist countries.
For the mirror opposite, a society which uses only meritocratic rewards will soon
have a very large disenfranchised subgroup due to Price’s Law (exponential differen-
tiation of rewards, since the rich get richer). In succeeding generations, the bottom
tier will not be able to afford training to compete and the separation will exacerbate
until the society destabilizes and collapses. That society then obviously gives less re-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

4 (cid:0) Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
wards to those who deserve them, diminishing its meritocracy. This failure was exem-
plified in )_th century America, which had few social protections for the poor and dis-
enfranchised.
Throughout history, governments have recognized the need to balance these val-
ues. The goal of a healthy society requires promotion of equal opportunities by provid-
ing equity of necessities, but also strives to provide fair rewards with a meritocracy for
nonessentials. The debate always erupts on the definition of the line between neces-
sities and nonessentials. If you say nothing is really essential, you are strongly favoring
meritocracy. If you say everything is essential, you are strongly favoring equity. When
you define your dividing line, you are signaling your personal judgment about what is
valuable.
Is air essential, or water? What about education? For two centuries, most every
nation has agreed a literate populace is beneficial to society and provided compulsory
public grammar school for children. How far does your belief in the right to an educa-
tion extend? Some believe graduate study at universities should be available to our
citizenry, as a right, throughout life. Some societies force people to become professors
in specific fields based on an IQ test in childhood. Do you believe society should force
those successful in business to share their knowledge and secrets in public online lec-
tures? How much education is a necessity, and how much should education be con-
trolled by the group instead of the individual?
As another example of the split, consider the goal of WebX engineers to eliminate
corruption by automating away legal regulation, policing, and insurance with smart
contracts, as described in the previous chapters. By automating insurance, the econ-
omy becomes more efficient. We then have the power to maintain automated insur-
ance for ourselves, without using middlemen insurance agents. Individuals become
more autonomous and more powerful. Individuals choose the level of catalyst protec-
tion they need, as they are best able to evaluate what is optimal.
But if the larger society is going to thrive under these new choices, we must avoid
a race to the bottom. It’s more efficient in the short term for an individual to forego
any insurance, so some will outcompete others if they are lucky enough to avoid rare
tragedies. But the rare unprotected tragedies can chill the entire system. Insurance,
policing, legal regulation, appeals, and news provide the overhead catalysts business
needs to maintain liquidity.
The answer that makes the economy efficient, is that all of society should share
the essentials, but individuals should be free to chase after their own desires for non-
essentials. There are two types of business: government business and private busi-
ness. Government business should be in charge of essentials. Private business should
be free to pursue non-essentials.
Overhead institutions, like insurance or policing, provide the catalyst activation
energy to guarantee liquidity in business—both government and private. The catalyst
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values (cid:0) 5
overcomes friction; it fights corruption. Overhead institutions to protect or promote
essentials should be governed and borne by the group, protecting and promoting non-
essentials should be governed and borne privately. Each DAO must decide what is es-
sential to its function; protection of those assets is governed democratically according
to their particular system. Each DAO has different goals and concerns. But to illustrate
the point with an overhead institution everyone is familiar with, consider healthcare.
Every country has determined a different level of healthcare as essential. How much
the society bears the cost of healthcare tells us how essential it is to them. Some so-
cieties might care so much about healthcare, they would believe continual elective
cosmetic surgery is a human right for all. At the other end of the spectrum, some so-
cieties might have no respect for medicine or individual health and provide absolutely
no legally protected medical support—for example, even life-or-death emergency ser-
vices would not be given unless the individuals provide for themselves ahead of time.
The choice of dividing line between essentials and non-essentials is the line between
government and business.
Individuals need to be responsible for choosing their own level of protection for
non-essentials. Individuals choose to regulate their own choice of overhead invest-
ment to promote their pursuit of non-essentials based on their momentary personal
tolerance for risk. For example, do you choose to pay to insure your smartwatch for
)* years or none? Do you hedge your personal investments with derivatives or not?
The network must identify the difference between essentials and non-essentials.
This means the network must identify its values. Importantly, the decision of what is
essential versus non-essential will change depending on the market. The system must
have a dynamic governance process for constantly reinterpreting our values in the
face of changing circumstances.
If the society values knowledge as a human right, to promote the development of
the individual, the society will provide advice on the options for overhead coverage
available to individuals for the protection of their non-essential pursuits. This requires
that society recognizes the need to educate individuals about the functions of the mid-
dlemen and their value. In this case the networks need a well-functioning history gen-
erator—good news sources and information repositories. These analyses need to be
dynamic, because the market continually changes. If the system is running well and
everyone is profiting, there is less need for insurance. When the profits decrease and
the system becomes more competitive, cheating becomes more attractive, and more
insurance and reputation policing is needed. All of this hinges on the determination of
what products are essential and what are non-essential. What is social property, what
is individual property? The answer depends on your particular values, and you should
participate in the network that works to promote those values.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

6 (cid:0) Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
Similarly, the other two dimensions divide along a single definition. In the distinc-
tion between bureaucratic transparency and personal privacy we define the differ-
ence between public and personal information. Where is the dividing line between
what the individual has a right to keep secret and what the society/network needs to
know to maintain security? Does society need to know what chemicals you are exper-
imenting with in your basement? Does society need to know your genetic information
so it can determine what type of preventative medical care you should be given? Does
society need to know your personal thoughts to determine whether you are a criminal
risk? These are all extremely contentious issues. This dividing line is the distinction
between the government and private media.
What does government keep secret or make public? What technology does the
government use to make public information available? Should all congressional delib-
erations be made public? Should every conversation a representative has regarding
public policy be recorded and made available to their constituents? Should all police
wear body cameras with continuous footage made available immediately to the pub-
lic? Should all government-funded weapons research be made public? Most draw the
line at less than complete and full transparency in every governmental action, but a
perfectly democratic society requires complete transparency. This is an abstraction,
but a DAO should clearly specify where their values lie, and where they would draw
the line between bureaucratic transparency and secrecy.
America tends to push the distinction towards personal privacy much further than
China does. America has decided the quantity and type of weapons in my basement is
none of my neighbor’s business, and the government should not be involved. In Ger-
many, governmental officials periodically inspect houses to countp rtihvaec yn umber of TVs
to ensure German households pay their proper public fees for TV licenses. In mainland
China, the PRC decides who your best friend will be for the rest of your life when they
decide who your roommate is, what university you will attend, and what major you
meritocracy
will study. The line between what is public information and private information is a
function of a society’s values.
In the distinction between communal cooperation and individual freedom, we are
defining the difference between governmental rights and personal freedom. What
equity
choices can you make—what can you do? In a healthy democracy, this dividing line
separates the power of government over peoples’ lives, versus the freedom we have
in our social lives.
In a healthy society, whether democratic or not, these dividing lines are a fa ithful
reflection of that group’s values.
transparency
[**Fix graphic below.]
Figure ): Three axes of values
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values (cid:0) 7
We can categorize every society, past and present, according to how they have
favored one value or its polar opposite. Failing to maintain a healthy balance—one
which faithfully reflects its peoples’ values—is what topples empires and leads to so-
cial catastrophe.
Finding a healthy balance between opposite values is an eternal challenge. Not
least because the definitions of the lines between the axes of these values should
change under different circumstances. When a society is at war, values change from
when it is at peace. But remember the goal is always to maximize both polar opposites
in each dimension.
At the same time that these transcendental values are crucial for maintaining
group coherence, they need to remain transcendental. Once they are formalized too
rigorously, they become more manipulable. For example, once the definition of ne-
cessity versus non-essential is specified clearly, it becomes a focal point for competi-
tion, instead of a unifying principle to maximize both equitable distribution of neces-
sities and meritocratic distribution of non-essentials.
This idea is illustrated by the tripartite motto which was popular in )hth century
revolutionary democracies (especially in France), “Freedom, Equality, and Good Will
towards Men”.1 (Liberté, Egalité. Fraternité.) Individual freedom and social equality
are at odds with each other. But both qualities should be maximized. If we were to
make a clear distinction between where our individual rights stop and social respon-
sibilities start, then that formal line becomes a focal point for competition which
makes the system brittle and unstable. Instead the line between the two values must
remain vague. The values need to be integrated with a third transcendental value,
“Good Will towards Men”, whatever that means technically—it’s not a logical pre-
scription. You know it when you see it. You can’t clearly define it, but it’s important.
Be good to each other. Individuals, help your society; and society, help your individu-
als. Once you clearly define the boundaries of that power, the focal point for compe-
tition leads to some gaining outsized power, corrupting the system, then things fall
apart.
These three dimensions of values each split along the definition of what is indi-
vidual, and what is social. Beyond any Folk Theorem justification for stability, the ulti-
mate reason we should not impose a clear distinction between the two is that there
is no clear distinction in nature. For instance, consider how babies are not viable indi-
viduals, they depend on their caregivers for everything. Before they are six months
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 ”True patriotism springs from a belief in the dignity of the individual, freedom and equality not only
for Americans but for all people on earth, universal brotherhood and good will, and a constant striving
toward the principles and ideals on which this country was founded.” –Eleanor Roosevelt’s Book of
Common Sense Etiquette, )CDE.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

8 (cid:0) Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
old, they are not in control of their limbs and they must whine in order to manipulate
their caregivers to give them food, instead of using their hands to put the food in their
mouths. When an individual grows up their material reliance on society never ends.
Thanks to our dependence on technology, no one can survive long without depending
on the complex tools that society provides. The distinction between the individual and
society is never clear cut, and the values of a network need to reflect this vagueness.
Every organization, especially every DAO, needs to value both the individual and the
group.
Throughout the book, we’ve argued that giving individuals more autonomy
through a decentralized architecture is more efficient. This needs to be balanced by
the need to unite as a group. Cooperation is more efficient than individual autonomy.
The network effect is only achieved when individuals subsume their freedom to act in
concert with the group. Again, both individual autonomy and group cohesion need to
be balanced to increase both qualities. Diminishing one diminishes the other.
Identifying the values of your network, or your society, or your DAO, is not some
meaningless academic exercise. Your network’s values determine your goals, which
determine how your rewards and punishments are set up, which determine your net-
work’s future and whether it will survive. As explored in Chapter k, you need to match
your governance design choices to your values, or else the reward structure will dic-
tate the true goals, which will determine what the network ultimately values.
A long-term successful network requires a dynamic and responsive system of gov-
ernance to keep the organization in the decentralized, democratic realm, and prevents
it from moving to the next natural stage of centralized governance with a static hier-
archy. In other words, we must protect the group from falling into static power rela-
tionships. The temptation is universal, because of the efficiency of centralization, but
it is provably flawed. (We explored these arguments, Condorcet’s Paradox, Arrow’s
Impossibility Theorem, and the Folk Theories of Game Theory with reputation in Chap-
ter l.)
At the same time, as we develop these new systems of governance, with these
newfound technological powers, we can’t abandon the crucial cultural achievements
that have brought each of our nations to this point in history. )*,*** years of civiliza-
tion have given us a deep collection of theories on how to govern ourselves and create
a fair and just world. We ignore this collective wisdom at our peril. There are many
essential institutions to be rescued from the corruption of our past political regimes.
Our new tools for designing and implementing centralized hierarchies are far
more sophisticated than ever before imagined. Our automated computer processing,
information storage, and light-speed globally-networked communication infrastruc-
ture are capable of achieving centralized organization that is more pervasive and pow-
erful than had been previously imagined in fiction. These tools can monitor and guide
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values (cid:0) 9
the behaviors of every person, animal, and machine on the planet through a single,
centralized bureaucracy.
If we commit too completely to this global, centralized, manmade hierarchy, if we
allow our bureaucracy to become too rigid and impersonal, the predictable fall could
be the final collapse. At this moment, and for the first time in history, we are building
a structure and organization that is encompassing the entire planet. We would do well
to heed the collective wisdom of history from such folk tales.2 The stories are there
to warn us, so we can avoid such stumbling stones. The collapse of a hierarchy can
come in many ways, not all of them catastrophic. We must understand the step that
follows any centralized organization, and be attentive to its signs and warnings. Why
does a centralized hierarchy collapse? When is it best to give power to centralized
organizations, and when is it best to invest in decentralized organizations?
A centralized hierarchy becomes too rigid when those policing the rules gain more
power than the members who are honoring the transcendental value that originally
founded the organization. The spirit of the law should always reign above the letter of
the law. As an organization loses touch with its transcendental values, members use
the rules to jockey for position in the hierarchy, and corruption erodes the effective-
ness of the organization.
Giving away personal individual power to structures with rigid rules is always en-
ticing, because it is often more efficient to follow the rules and not question them. A
moral justification is that the rules apply equally to all. And people have been habitu-
ated for untold millennia to trust that cooperating with others is a better choice than
causing strife in the group by resisting the flow.
Our success over other animals is often attributed to our opposable thumbs, our
upright posture, ability to form complex speech, or our big brains’ outsized capacity
to process information. But from an organizational point of view, humanity’s unique
strength is its ability to cooperate on a massive scale, which really kicked in around
n*,*** years ago. This derives from our ability to copy each other’s behaviors by hold-
ing a mental model of other humans in our mind. We can go further than other animals
in this ability as we can make models of what we imagine the other humans have in
their minds. We can visualize how Alice thinks about what Bob thinks about what Car-
los thinks about Eve. Supposedly this modeling process goes o or k levels deep in hu-
mans.3 This ability to learn from others’ behaviors gives us enormous capacity to un-
leash the efficiency of cooperation. But it also gives us untold power to trick other
(cid:0)(cid:0)
2 The descent into chaos and collapse from centralized hierarchies is a common theme across cultures
throughout history. Here are a few examples:**add selections from previous appendix.
3 Crows can make at least E levels of mental models, since they can watch another crow experiment
and learn to solve a puzzle opening a box for a food reward. The crow who watched will immediately
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

10 (cid:0) Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
people as we imagine manipulating others to corrupt the organization for our individ-
ual benefit at the expense of the group.
These same information-processing tools that can lead to centralized cooperation
are also capable of empowering individuals, and guarding against the abuses of a cor-
rupt hierarchy. The tools of internet communication allow individuals to connect with
anyone on the planet to foster new opportunities for inventing collaboration. The
transistor revolution is putting a super computer in every person’s pocket. Each indi-
vidual has access to a personal information repository with the capacity of all the
books in the U.S. Library of Congress.4 Never in any previous generation of history has
any emperor had the personal power over information that the average person has
today.
The goal of this book has been to explain the new social structures that are evolv-
ing which can give individuals more power while also giving groups more social cohe-
sion. More robust decentralized systems can provide greater bureaucratic transpar-
ency and more personal privacy. We have new technologies that can be employed to
make the economy more efficient, productive, and sustainable by enabling a fair mer-
itocracy and a more responsive regulatory environment which promotes equity. These
decentralized organizations can provide the level playing field that allow local central-
ized groups to flourish, while preventing the degeneration naturally resulting from
competition, which leads to a rigid and brittle globally dominating centralized organi-
zation.
To enact this vision, we need universal transcendental values which can unify all
of humanity. Do such ideals exist? If not, can we construct them?
Universal values from science and poetry
Most scientists take for granted that nature, even the entire universe, is a decen-
tralized organization, a DAO. They are looking for the rules behind it all, the protocols,
the code that keeps it running autonomously in an organized manner. Most scientists
are atheists; unlike the religious faithful they don’t believe in a centralized universe, a
single hierarchy which governs all existence. But most scientists also aren’t nihilists.
They believe the cosmos has order. They don’t believe there is nothing but empty,
meaningless chaos, because they devote their lives to finding patterns in nature. Why
(cid:0)(cid:0)
solve the puzzle when faced with the challenge for the first time individually. A pigeon, on the other
hand, will watch another learn to solve a puzzle, then display no learning once they are personally
faced with the same challenge.
4 Not including pictures, there is around )D terabytes of data in the )D million books, which costs less
than USNO** commercially in E*E*.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values (cid:0) 11
do they believe such a position, that there are rules behind the jiggling of atoms in the
void? Why do scientists bother to seek rules at all? Why should they expect order to
arise from behind their investigations if there isn’t a God to put it there in the first
place, to make meaning from the chaos?
Darwin created the first successful scientific model which posits the possibility of
sustained complex order arising from chaos, without the intervention of any intelli-
gent, organizing ruler. Life is a local contravention of the Wnd Law of Thermodynamics
from physics, which posits that all organized systems move toward chaos and away
from order when seen from a wide enough perspective. Thanks to the sun pumping
vast energy into our system, flooding Earth with light, life forms can utilize some small
part of the energy the sun is dissipating to scrap together order, persistent patterns,
from the muck. The Theory of Darwinian Evolution is an extremely simple law for ex-
plaining the profusion of natural forms, from biological organisms to global ecosys-
tems: Through the rather wasteful destruction of trillions of lives, successful biological
forms are naturally selected from unsuccessful mutant variations simply because they
survive and reproduce. More complex variations occasionally outcompete simpler life
forms, and so complexity emerges.
From a wider perspective, if we imagine the universe eternally chaotically jiggling
its energy in the void of space, we can imagine all possible patterns revealing them-
selves eventually. The anthropocentric position puts forth the proposition that we are
here in this little vicinity of order because the universe waited unfathomably long pe-
riods of time, perhaps through many universes’ births and deaths, before the patterns
became suitably complex for organized life to witness it. We’re seeing order, because
of an extremely rare random shift in circumstance generated the unlikely coincidence
that allowed partly ordered beings to witness it. Then we’re doomed to degenerate
back into chaos for most of the rest of time. Perhaps even simpler, from a probabilistic
perspective, amongst all the patterns that ever emerge, the patterns that repeat
themselves will be observed more often. So it should be no surprise statistically that
we exist to witness such a state.
As Darwin himself predicted, the revelation that nature doesn’t need a personal-
ized God to explain its complex existence led (and still leads) many people to renounce
their religious faith. Darwin feared the consequences to society when they lose the
prime justification for their transcendental values—the values by which society can
justify overcoming their selfishness in order to cooperate harmoniously.
Still, while abandoning a religious fundamentalist vision of any personalized God,
by their very occupation of seeking theories, scientists believe in a simple, meaningful
order behind the confusing illusion of chaos that confronts us personally on a daily
basis. Scientists search for fundamental order that our tiny speck of a brain can com-
prehend to explain the infinite cosmos. Why would it be possible for a tiny fraction of
the universe to be able to form a complete map of the whole? That could only happen
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

12 (cid:0) Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
if there are simple laws that govern the whole universe, if there is meaning which
organizes being, if there is such a thing as truth. If there is a universal truth, then there
is at least a hierarchy of human understanding, a ranking of better and worse perspec-
tives and ideas. A universal set of laws, fundamental truth, predicates the existence of
a centralized organizing force to the universe. A centralized organizing force that
touches each and every person’s life, in an intimate way through palpable forces, each
moment of every day. That truth, itself, is the God that scientists worship. The ultimate
Truth is the God they seek. Even the scientists who rigorously discipline themselves to
erase all evidence of a benevolent deity from their thoughts and beliefs, find them-
selves enthralled to a fundamental urge to see the universe as ultimately hospitable
to life and truth.5
Science distinguishes itself from every other spiritual network by measuring its
success in carving out pieces of their ultimate truth with mundane, reproduceable
demonstrations of its laws. Compared with the miraculous and larger social question
that religions attempt to explain, science has therefore necessarily focused on more
basic, trivial phenomena, such as the motion of a rolling ball (gravity), or the sparks
discharged by rubbing sheepskin on glass (electricity), or pollen jiggling in a vat of beer
(atomic forces). The discovery of the laws behind these three palpable forces has led
to every modern technological advance. Scientists measure their success by how much
they contribute to the goal of revealing these universal rules which govern the uni-
verse; their status in their particular quasi-religious hierarchy is notably more measur-
able and objective than other religions.
Science as a globally open discipline is extremely decentralized politically. No per-
son, university, institution, or nation has monopoly control over whether any theory
becomes established scientific fact. But this global Science DAO is very protocol cen-
tralized around objective universal Truth.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
5 We’re not aware of the precise philosophical term for this argument that Science is effectively a
religion with Truth as its God, but it is by no means a novel concept. Indeed this idea spawned several
sects and cults shortly after the success of Darwin’s work on evolution. For example, in William James,
The Varieties of Religious Experience, )C)W he writes on p WD, “Science, and our so-called ‘Civilization’
as these things are now organized and admiringly believed in, form the more genuine religions of our
time” referring to J. R. Seeley, Natural Religion, Od edition, Boston, )]]D, pp C), )EE. See also pp C*,
)O] where he uses the term “naturalism” to refer to this idea of science as religion, and p ^]O. One of
the many definitions of “scientism” is close to this argument. See Thomas M. Lessl, “Naturalizing sci-
ence: Two episodes in the evolution of a rhetoric of scientism”, Western Journal of Communication,
D*:^, pp OWC-OCD ()CCD). Related ideas include deism, the Cult of Reason, the Cult of the Supreme
Being, Religion of Humanity, transcendentalism, rationalism, materialism, positivism, empiricism, and
energeticism, C. Hakfoort Science deified: Wilhelm Osstwald's energeticist world-view and the history
of scientism, Annals of Science, ^C:D, pp eEe-e^^, ()CCE).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values (cid:0) 13
Most scientists take for granted the universe itself is a decentralized organization,
a DAO. They are looking for the rules behind it all, the protocols, the code that keeps
it running autonomously in the organized manner we predictably witness. We person-
alize or anthropomorphize these rules when we make the leap to a religious perspec-
tive, by asking what values this universal protocol reflects? What is the goal of the
universal DAO? Most atheist scientists reject such questions as unnecessary, even un-
earned and contraindicated, from the collection of truths that science has managed
so far to assemble.
But scientists have not earned the right to make such a judgment, and they never
can. Science’s focus on the mundane has created remarkable advances in mundane
technology. Their obsessive myopic focus on mundane forces limits their area of ex-
pertise to mundane physical arenas. Our understanding of psychology and sociology
has made profound advances. But we are still far from definitively addressing how to
solve personal conundrums in any way approaching the authoritative solutions sci-
ence provides in answering how to put a rocket on the moon. Freud promised a scien-
tific answer to such personal and social problems more than a century ago, but we are
further than ever from that goal. Our scientific understanding of consciousness is su-
perficial, despite the resources we’ve expended in the investigation. Scientists do not
deserve to rule on the question of whether we should ask what the meaning is behind
the rules guiding the universe, or the values they might reflect. They have less author-
ity on this subject than someone who studies spirituality or theology or morality or
poetry.
The Folk Theorems and other impossibility results illustrate the need for transcen-
dental values for unifying people in harmonious cooperation. Transcendental values
cannot be stated formally and explicitly, unlike scientific laws. People who are in touch
with transcendental beauty, true poets, need to be the authors of our transcendental
values. But these poets need to be grounded. They need to have concrete contact with
the universe. They need to understand it—to comprehend the universe and its laws—
to make meaningful goals.
Decentralization requires every member to participate in the construction of
those values. A decentralized network is only as strong as its members and the envi-
ronment it exists in. The strength of a decentralized organization is measured by sum-
ming the power of each member in their individual autonomy, but this is modified by
the ability of the group to organize and effect its goals in the larger society. How well
can members cooperate? The power of a DAO is its power to unite in service to the
goal of shared values. In a decentralized organization, which doesn’t coerce its mem-
bers like centralized organizations, its power is determined by how devoted its mem-
bers are to its values. In constructing these values, every member needs to be a poet
and a historian, a monk and a scientist, linking the talents of writing transcendental
values and evaluating grounded mundane facts.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

14 (cid:0) Chapter )* – Transcendental Unifying Values
Decentralized organizations demand more from their members and return more,
in autonomous power and profit. Centralized organizations shelter their members
within a niche in a hierarchy. Centralized organizations limit the power of their mem-
bers, stultifying them, in exchange for the security of knowing they will have a place
to belong, as long as they fulfill their role as a cog in the machine, as long as the group
survives. Decentralized organizations are ultimately more efficient and versatile, more
stable socially and individually generative. They’re as stable as their autonomous
members’ adherence to their ideals. But their very autonomy requires the members
to construct the unifying ideals for themselves. They are individually responsible for
nourishing and revitalize those unifying ideals, continually. No book can contain those
transcendental values. Our goal in this chapter is not even to make a failed attempt.
We only wish to point to the necessity for such individually generated, socially unifying
ideals, and offer a gauge with which to analyze them and measure their success.
Bibliography
Formating example:
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782220

