Chapter ) – Governance 1
Decentralized Governance
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
Chapter ) introduces governance designs for decentralized systems. Decentral-
ized governance is the process of keeping decentralized organizations stable and on
track to achieve their goals, without letting them devolve into a centralized organiza-
tion. Decentralized organizations are naturally more difficult to control than central-
ized organizations. They are more difficult to govern. Very few existing PCP project
have anything close to a sophisticated governance process.
The authors show that reputation is the key to achieving effective decentralized
governance. Reputation gives the promise of future rewards. Reputation can be ob-
jectively valued, by estimating the probability of future business deals, taking the ex-
pected value of that probability, and calculating the present value of those business
deals. Yet this value can seemingly be created from nothing, in a place it didn’t exist
before, based solely on whether the participants choose to display good will toward
each other. This makes reputation a positive-sum property from the game-theory per-
spective. A reputational system that is formally linked to profits makes the members
forward-thinking and cooperative, to combat the natural tendency of competition to
separate members. It also motivates members to self-police their past investments.
Reputation changes the incentive structure from a single-stage, zero-sum game to a
repeated positive-sum game.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

2 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
Chapter 6. Governance
“Many people believe that decentralization means loss of control. That's simply
not true. You can improve control if you look at control as the control of events and
not people. Then, the more people you have controlling events - the more people you
have that care about controlling the events, the more people you have proactively
working to create favorable events - the more control you have within the organiza-
tion, by definition.”
—Wilbur L. Creech, The Five Pillars of TQM, TUUV.
Governance is a fundamental human concern, which has been continually de-
bated since humans learned to speak. Governance is a primary subject of study within
philosophy, ethics, economics, political science, law, sociology, social psychology, cy-
bernetics, control theory, etc. Choices of governance structures for DAOs must con-
sciously grapple with these theories and examples that have arisen throughout his-
tory. Throughout history, however, people have repeatedly failed to organize
effectively, and corruption has arisen in every circumstance, even without anonymity,
in the less extreme situation involving identified members of the same culture under
face-to-face circumstances with deep community ties. What chance do we have of
eliminating corruption and perfecting our governmental institutions? None, of course.
In his Dictionary of Philosophy, Voltaire highlighted the Italian proverb, “Il meglio è
l'inimico del bene.” The perfect is the enemy of the good. But we can improve our
institutions if we use the advances of technology wisely. Today we have new tools at
our disposal for improving governance.
Governance is the set of protocols that determine what behaviors are acceptable
or unacceptable and how they are rewarded or punished. Governance determines
how an organization is organized. Governance is the organization. Governing a decen-
tralized organization, however, is much more difficult than governing a centralized hi-
erarchical organization.
This book probably seems obsessed with stability. In order to achieve the goals of
a decentralized organization, some measure of control is required. The organization
must be organized. Decentralized organizations are naturally more difficult to control
than centralized organizations. They are more difficult to govern. The word “govern”
comes from the Greek kubernos meaning to steer. Kubernos is the origin of the term
cybernetics, which is the mathematical subject of control theory, which helps us steer
rocket ships to the moon and steer underseas robots through the Mariana Trench.
Control theory gives us the design to keep controlled explosions running stably for
decades in nuclear reactors, and it keeps our global supply chain running efficiently
with less redundancy and downtime thanks to dynamic programming.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 3
Steering a decentralized organization, guiding it without centralized control, is a
delicate procedure. Governance is the process of keeping the organization stable and
on track to achieve its goals, without letting it devolve into a centralized organization,
which is a natural progression once clear goals are identified and competition
emerges.
There are flaws with every governance process that has ever been implemented.
In fact, it seems clear no perfect governance system is possible under very minimal
assumptions, such as non-dictatorship (cf., Chapter a). Nevertheless, it is our goal is to
find practical and effective governance structures for the most challenging groups that
exist: DAOs.
Part of the challenge of governance is that most members should never notice its
existence—when they do, something has probably gone wrong. The best governance
will require only the subtlest changes in the reward mechanism to keep the organiza-
tion healthy as changes happen in the DAO and in the marketplace. Ideally, even these
subtle changes would be automated, so that only changes to the changes need be
debated.
Decentralized power has been a conscious goal since the Tcth century.1 In the
long term, or when the situation is dynamic and unpredictable, decentralized organi-
zations can be more efficient than hierarchical organizations. We gain greater flexibil-
ity and more options for efficiency using the decentralized power structure of inter-
acting domains of expertise. Now the technology of accounting has caught up, so that
it is possible to account for good and bad behavior on a seemingly infinitesimal scale
without resorting to a centralized system for recording, processing and transmitting
information. Advances in digital electronic data storage make it possible for the first
time in history to record every member’s contributions to an organization. PCP tech-
nology gives actors and organizations the environment to collaborate on neutral ter-
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 Of course, there are many precursors which are also worthy of study. Quaker governance, since the
?)th century, has put special emphasis on nurturing member communication with strict protocols. No
decisions are ever made except unanimously (which may account for their doctrinal fragmentation
into various sects). There are no votes. Debates are not permitted, nor even direct responses to others’
contributions. The idea is not to have your personal argument win, but to discover God’s will.
Ancient Greek society hosted a particularly direct democracy which governed the highest decisions to
the lowest, from deciding whether to wage war down to where the next street will be built. Greek
direct democracy relied on a clever process of sortition. Sortition is the random selection of represent-
atives. They used a kleroterion, which was a device somewhat analogous to a complicated bean board
or pachinko machine, to select their temporary delegates.
In a testament to the power of logic to withstand millennia of change, Aristotle’s Ethics and Politics
(Lth century B.C.) are still remarkably cogent expositions categorizing and analyzing the different pos-
sible governance structures, whose insights are required reading for P?st century digital architects.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

4 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
ritory, where each member has equal power in creating the environment where eve-
ryone can broadcast to and receive from an unlimited network of members. We have
arrived at a historically novel situation technologically. We now have the power to
create far more decentralized and democratic institutions than ever before.
Decentralized organizations can be more productive because they can distribute
the proper amount of power to the proper talent at the proper time, eliminating sys-
tem frictions such as corruption. To ensure such dynamic power organization is suc-
cessfully implemented, the governance structure of a DAO must incentivize members
to collaborate productively, by fairly rewarding development, work, and the policing
of any diminishments.
Many issues arise when attempting to implement a governance system which in-
corporates these qualities yet is also effective and efficient. Benevolent dictators are
much more efficient and effective than messy democracies, but the long-term stability
of a powerful public PCP network is threatened by such centralized governance. So
there is naturally debate (in the blockchain community, e.g.) about the best way to
find consensus on protocol changes.
There is not a single PCP project in existence today which has anything close to a
sophisticated governance process. Most are grounded with a strong anarchic or liber-
tarian attitude. These revolutionary projects are responses to failings in our current
system. Therefore, the very mention of a constitution for a PCP platform has invoked
a reaction of disgust in the past. Developers have naturally been suspicious of any
attempt to build old systems of control into their revolutionary platforms. The old sys-
tems are failing, and new architectures are necessary to properly exploit the techno-
logical innovations of this new age.
All PCP networks need to organize soft forks for protocol upgrades, because there
can never be a perfectly designed system, as the Folk Theorems attest. More practi-
cally, every network has to continually improve to survive. To attract members and
users, user interfaces need to be intuitive; the programming interfaces must keep up
to date with the latest changes in software design to keep and attract developers; the
technology must use the latest engineering advances for hardware. How do you mo-
tivate all this work?
Blockchains which have instituted (or intend to institute) on-chain governance to
a greater extent include Dash, Bitshares, Lisk, MemoryCoin, Tendermint, Tezos, Ara-
gon, Cardano, Maker, and NuShares. To a lesser degree, the Ethereum carbon vote
represents on-chain governance. Examples of off-chain democratized blockchain gov-
ernance has included Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs), Ethereum Improvement
Proposals (EIPs), mailing lists, and nonbinding suggestion pages on the internet such
as GitHub trees. At the moment, however, no major blockchain is entirely decentral-
ized, because they all lack pure binding coded PCP anonymous governance.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 5
Choosing no explicit or formal rules is still a governance choice. That choice de-
faults to the prehistoric rule of might makes right. Since might is defined by wealth,
they’ve chosen oligarchy. In ChCh, all of the major valuable platforms are naked oli-
garchies, where rule changes are determined by whoever has the most fungible plat-
form currency or concentrated computing power.
The entire history of civilization has shown us how dangerous that is. It leaves
itself open to many arbitrage opportunities, such as Soros’ Break-the-Bank attack on
the British pound. (We’ll discuss that example in Chapter c for stablecoins.) This is
especially insecure in a system that strives for anonymity and places itself beyond the
protection of any national jurisdiction. Currently, there are not many useful institu-
tions such as banking in the decentralized economy which would allow adversaries to
take advantage of their governance weaknesses. With only a few Thh billion USD in
capitalization driven entirely by speculation that it may be useful in the future, the
crypto economy is not yet a significant factor in international commerce. Competing
platforms have an incentive to keep the peace until these PCP platforms prove the
economy needs them. However, we can witness these realities developing quickly.
When they do materialize, the decentralized economy will be rocked by catastrophes
which expose these weaknesses.
The lack of governance is especially dangerous for these PCP platforms, because
it is extremely difficult for decentralized organizations to change their rules. The
United States built a system into its Constitution for amending the rules, but in Cjh
tumultuous years of operation there have only been Ta changes. This despite yearly
crises, including a civil war that split the country across the middle. This despite
changes in information technology that started with writing the original rules with
goose feathers on sheepskin. Hundreds of millions of new network members follow
those old rules, but now the rules are shared by bouncing them off satellites in space
between citizens’ pockets.
When a large decentralized organization needs a fundamental rule change, it of-
ten happens because a large minority subgroup is being treated unfairly. That typically
means the majority is advantaged by the rules and are therefore not incentivized to
change the rules. Then the only way to make foundational changes is revolution.
When Ethereum chose to make a minor change to fix a single bug exploited by a single
member (the ChTk DAO attack) a minority revolted, splitting the network. Distributing
power in a valuable network creates major path dependencies. Getting the govern-
ance system right from the beginning is absolutely crucial.2
(cid:0)(cid:0)
2 “You will never get right until you start right.” –Voltairine de Cleyre, The Economic Tendency of Free-
thought, Liberty, Vol. XI, #PX (?YZ[).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

6 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
Currently, the vast majority of Webj projects rely on their founders to do a good
job at the beginning and hope there never needs to be an important structural update
after the first roadmap is complete. Since the field is in massive flux, the lack of gov-
ernance is pretty well hidden. No important roadmaps have been completed, yet. The
fact that the reliance on founders represents de facto centralization isn’t too glaring,
yet. At the moment, since new companies come and go, new problems can be ad-
dressed by cloning older open-source architectures with superficial changes.
Since no major PCP organization has anything resembling effective decentralized
governance, none of them are viable in the long term. They will all eventually be dis-
rupted with superior clones. This doesn’t mean they won’t be useful in the short term,
so predicting when they will become irrelevant is impossible.
It is perhaps understandable that these immature systems don’t have sophisti-
cated governance mechanisms. Designing a single consensus algorithm is infinitely
easier than designing a consensus algorithm that will incorporate all future updates to
the consensus algorithm. Before the decentralized economy can actually emerge to
improve our current institutions, though, this must be achieved for long-term stability.
Many developers are beginning to understand this, and the hard line against constitu-
tions is softening.
How do we achieve governance in a decentralized organization without imposing
a centralized hierarchy to make decisions? Fortunately, we’ve been addressing this
impossible necessity and developing governments based on decentralized principles
throughout history. Egypt practiced decentralized judicial governance for jhhh years.
Every democratic government since Ancient Greece has been an experiment in decen-
tralized executive governance. The most powerful DAO in history was the United
States. All governments have been flawed, but we can learn from their mistakes.
In this chapter we explore what is needed to design an effective governance pro-
cess for a decentralized network or DAO without any central hierarchy to make deci-
sions or drive innovation. Essentially, we need a constitution for a radically democratic
organization. An incorruptible governance process, one which has never been
achieved before, sounds unlikely—especially as we witness old and established dem-
ocratic institutions failing.
But there are new information technology tools that give us more power to dem-
ocratically govern decentralized organizations. We can poll every member of the
group almost instantly. We can keep track of every member’s contributions. We can
judge them according to programmed processing of unlimited complexity. All of these
information technology tasks can now also be achieved redundantly, by each member
of the group, so each member is autonomous and doesn’t rely on some central over-
seer or repository.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 7
The only requirement for decentralized governance is to design this third govern-
ance processing protocol by which the entire organization can agree to judge each
other by. The first goal of this chapter is to identify such a governance process that
keeps the organization decentralized and stable.
Secondly, once this governance process is established, we need to make design
choices that reflect the goals of the group. The goals are literally what the group val-
ues. For instance, if the group values long-term stability, they should encourage in-
vestment and tokens of power which pay annuities in the long term. If they value im-
mediate innovation, they should reward development more than maintenance.
Decentralized governance with new IT tools
The purpose of a pure DAO is to allow any users on the planet to join anonymously
(or pseudonymously). Such users have a natural incentive to exploit any opportunity
to profit personally, even if it comes at the expense of the group. At the same time,
DAOs have no centralized authority empowered to police or guide behavior. A pro-
gram for solving all these problems under these extreme circumstances is forbiddingly
ambitious. What hope do we have of finding an effective governance structure when
users are likely to be pseudonymous and occupy uncertain locations in various juris-
dictions?
How do we create a system which can update itself in a peaceful, stable, and pre-
dictable way, in response to unpredictable future changes in the market? We need a
constitution which outlines the powers of the legislative, executive, and judicial sys-
tems of the decentralized network. The legislative system updates the constitution
itself. The executive system enforces the constitution. The judicial system handles in-
evitable disputes. All of this needs to be built into a code-is-law smart contract small
enough to be easily parsed and audited by humans and run efficiently in a redundant
peer-to-peer setting.
Contemporary PCP technology allows us, for the first time in history, to coordinate
communication without a centralized authority in a secure and redundant fashion, to
keep track of every important contribution, and to store those records eternally for
future review. This review gives us the chance to analyze the consequences of every
action and fairly reward the positive contributions to the group and punish the nega-
tive. One of the major efficiencies of a decentralized organization is that all rewards
can be shared with the people who contribute to the success of the group, fairly, ac-
cording to their merit.
We broadly define corruption in an organization as any action that benefits a mi-
nority at the greater expense of the group. Corruption arises when power is distrib-
uted inappropriately as measured by efficiency. Corruption arises in the dark, when
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

8 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
people or institutions have the power to act without review. Broadcasting technology
provides us the opportunity to transparently share evidence of all actions so they can
be reviewed. Processing technology gives each person the power to independently
judge these actions’ value. This inhibits corruption, by distributing power efficiently to
those who can use it best to improve the group.
Just because we can cite every action from a company on a blockchain, however,
does not mean we have conquered corruption. More information does not ensure
more productive collaboration. How do we discern the signal through the noise?
Members must be properly motivated to behave correctly and to police corrupt be-
havior when it happens. This is the goal of governance.
Cash profits are a bad immediate incentive for business and government. The car-
toon scenario of a DAO consisting of anonymous members who stake their currency
on rigid smart contracts gives the worst imaginable motivations for collaboration. If
the entire proximal goal of a transaction is currency, all participants will naturally be-
have in the most selfish manner possible, exploiting any opportunity for individual
profit at the expense of the group.
Further, rigid “code is law” smart contracts involving fungible currency exchanges
are designed to guarantee irreversible, unreviewable, programmed self-execution.
Very rarely does any business venture proceed exactly as imagined from the begin-
ning. To enter into any business arrangement, parties need to have confidence that
fair resolution will occur when transactions do not go according to plan. They need to
know whether to continue business after an unforeseen event.
Moreover, rigid “code is law” smart contracts will need to be extremely complex
to account for the many possible eventualities of practical business situations. The
insurmountable reality is that bugs or hacks can never be certainly precluded in any
programmable contract.3 Beyond this, long-term attacks will always be possible for
any complicated and rigid set of rules, as the infinitude of strategies generated by the
Folk Theorems demonstrates. If the entire reward is short-term currency profit, all
parties are naturally motivated to push the contract as far as possible in their favor,
and they will naturally exploit any weakness in the contract design to their advantage.
The typical engineering attitude is that such problems can be entirely avoided
with perfect system design. This is naïve. Exceptions will always exist. Business com-
petition always seeks optimal solutions which occur at the limits of the rules of behav-
ior. Good system design is possible, but requires dealing with the exceptions. Once
the process is in place for dealing with exceptions and improving the process to handle
exceptions, exceptions become more and more rare, and the system becomes more
efficient. As much as possible, we must automate such constitutional functions for
(cid:0)(cid:0)
3 Despite the laudable efforts toward secure purely functional programming languages such as Haskell.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 9
efficiency. This requires explicit formal rules for as many behaviors as possible, which
multiplies the protocols without limit. In tension with this requirement, we must limit
the rules to make them as simple as possible and allow maximum freedom for inno-
vation. The ideal rules never need to be enforced as they are naturally incentivized by
productive cooperation that achieves the goals of the group.
The motivation for all parties to behave as selfishly as possible creates instability
for any business transaction. More harmonious collaboration is motivated when im-
proved reputation is the proximal goal. The situation is no longer a zero-sum game
when either or both parties can create valuable long-term reputation from the trans-
action.
Instability from profit motive and rigid rules
The major characteristics of the network that dictate design choices are T)
whether the group is devoted primarily to profit, and C) the values of the group.
The two ends of the spectrum are non-profit organizations with uniform values,
and for-profit companies with diverse values. Ideologically centralized (uniform val-
ues) nonprofit organizations are extremely stable and work well without explicit rig-
orous rules. Historical examples include much of the history of Imperial China, the
Apache’s nomadic period, and Wikipedia. DAO examples would include nonprofits de-
voted to charity, local community social organizations (like YMCAs), and local govern-
ance sub-councils devoted to improving the community of a non-diverse population.
The less explicit the rules are, the more they should not strictly adhere to precedent—
spirit of the law must supersede the letter of the law. If the system has less explicit
rules, the unifying force is transcendental values—values which cannot be explicitly
written down, dictating what is acceptable or not. An example of a transcendental
value is the Golden Rule, “Treat others like you would be treated.” An example of an
explicit rule is, “Murder is punished with Th years in jail.”
Ideologically decentralized (diverse values) for profit organizations are the decen-
tralized organizations we are concerned with in this book. They are on the other end
of the spectrum from value centralized non-profit organizations, and so they are nat-
urally very unstable. We assume these DAOs want to maximize the network effect,
and so are trying to build the largest, most inclusive group of members possible. They
are open to anonymous members with a diverse set of values from a globally diverse
set of cultural backgrounds, who can join or leave at will. These characteristics make
such DAOs extremely unstable, so they need powerful stabilizing structures.
The internal competition for profit creates the natural tendency to centralize
power as the members differentiate themselves with wins and losses. This centralizing
tendency is another force further destabilizing the organizations.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

10 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
Diverse (decentralized) values require protocol centralization (explicit, enforcea-
ble rules), because stability requires impartial application of laws to display fairness.
Explicit rules can unite a larger group of more diverse members. In other words, the
governance system must follow rigid Rule of Law, instead of loose Rule of Virtue.
Explicit rigid rules are also more efficient. Members waste less energy making
choices.
However, these unifying rules further destabilize the group in the long-term, be-
cause of internal corruption and external changes that make the rule structure inef-
fective or inefficient.
This situation of for-profit, open, diverse-valued, rigid Rule of Law run decentral-
ized organizations is maximally unstable. Therefore, you must add powerful stabilizing
forces to their governance.
Reputation counters instability from profit motive
The main problem with all current PCP governance structures (such as they are)
is the lack of proper incentivization. In business or in government, all participants need
to be motivated to improve the whole organization over the long term. Otherwise,
when short-term fungible rewards are available, the natural response is to always at-
tempt to game the system for maximal personal profit and to ignore how your actions
may damage the group.
A reputational system that is formally linked to profits makes the members for-
ward-thinking and cooperative, to combat the natural tendency of competition to sep-
arate members. It also motivates members to self-police their past investments. Rep-
utation changes the incentive structure from a single-stage, zero-sum game to a
repeated positive-sum game.
Reputation gives the promise of future rewards. Reputation can be objectively
valued, by estimating the probability of future business deals, taking the expected
value of that probability, and calculating the present value of those business deals. Yet
this value can seemingly be created from nothing, in a place it didn’t exist before,
based solely on whether the participants choose to display good will toward each
other. This makes reputation a positive-sum property from the game-theory perspec-
tive.4
(cid:0)(cid:0)
4 Arguably the source of good will would be the promise of profit from rational choices in long-term
cooperation in an expanding market. Like physics experiments where energy is added to a subsystem,
Conservation of Energy is not actually violated from the wider, universal perspective. The positive-sum
situation holds from the near-sighted perspective of specific subgroups over a limited time period.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 11
No centralized platform, such as Amazon or eBay, has been able to create mean-
ingful and secure online reputation. Because they are centrally owned and controlled
they cannot give members the power and incentives they need to police their own
reputation, protecting it from the infinite strategies available to adversaries for sub-
verting the intentions of the designers (which the Folk Theorems of Game Theory il-
lustrate). With the new opportunities that PCP technology creates, decentralizing and
distributing reputation fairly, and tying it to the profits of the organization, the mem-
bers can be properly incentivized and empowered to police all actions. Giving DAO
members the ability to fairly apportion power in a variety of domains lessens the dan-
ger of the principal-agent problem and combats several Tragedy of the Commons
problems, such as non-representativeness and free-riding.
A platform which vests users with secure and valuable reputation gives us the
opportunity to effectively filter the voluminous information that contemporary tech-
nology produces. People with higher reputation will have greater voice.
Power is diffused by reputation, as discussed in Chapter k. Thus, reputation sta-
bilizes the organization by decentralizing it. One of the major sources of instability
from unequal power distribution is the ever-present possibility of a majority oppress-
ing a minority. De Tocqueville criticized American democracy as being particularly sus-
ceptible to this Tyranny of the Majority and argued it could ruin any democratic or-
ganization. De Tocqueville and Madison5 and others claimed the best safeguard
against this is by diversifying interests. Giving individuals more autonomy naturally
(cid:0)(cid:0)
From the eternal perspective, reputation allows the system to achieve a sub-game perfect Nash equi-
librium with a higher profit level, so the reputation is not value created from nowhere.
5 “It is of great importance in a republic, not only to guard the society against the oppression of its
rulers, but to guard one part of the society against the injustice of the other part. Different interests
necessarily exist in different classes of citizens. If a majority be united by a common interest, the rights
of the minority will be insecure. There are but two methods of providing against this evil: the one by
creating a will in the community independent of the majority, that is, of the society itself; the other,
by comprehending in the society so many separate descriptions of citizens as will render an unjust
combination of a majority of the whole very improbable, if not impracticable.” –Federalist No. X? (b
February ?)YY)
“In a free Government, the security for civil rights must be the same as that for religious rights. It
consists in the one case in the multiplicity of interests, and in the other in the multiplicity of sects. The
degree of security in both cases, will depend on the number of interests and sects; and this may be
presumed to depend on the extent of country and number of People comprehended under the same
Government.” –Federalist No. X? (b February ?)YY)
“The essence of Government is power; and power, lodged as it must be in human hands, will ever be
liable to abuse.” –Speech in the Virginia Constitutional Convention, P December ?YPZ, The Writings of
James Madison: ?Y?Z-?Ygb (?Z?[), ed. Galliard Hunt, p. gb?
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

12 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
diversifies the expressed interests of a group. Encouraging individual autonomy by de-
centralizing power creates more minorities, which is the best way to protect minori-
ties.
Any such reputation system must address the many problems, such as sockpup-
pet attacks, Tyranny of the Majority, Tragedy of the Commons, VT% attacks, and free
riding, that have undermined the meaning and value of digital reputation on all previ-
ous platforms, centralized or decentralized. Further, it needs to be a dynamic and evo-
lutionary system, able to anticipate and react to gaming that will inevitably result from
whatever rules are in place. Review Chapter k, to see how to address such problems.
Alternatives to reputational systems for countering the instability generated by
profit competition include external stabilizing forces (such as governmental fiat) or
rapidly expanding profit opportunities (which will only stabilize a group until the ex-
pansion stops). Colonialism gives historical examples, such as the Spanish Empire in
the Americas or the Dutch East India Company.
Trying to institute dynamic rules to attenuate the instability due to a for-profit
motive is a mismatch. Similarly instituting a reputational system is not an efficient
method for attenuating the instability due to a group’s diverse values.
Once reviewable reputation is the focus instead of more fungible currency re-
wards, damaging arbitrage opportunities are minimized. The next major concern for
creating a healthy governance process is to decide how to reach consensus on proto-
cols for behavior. What process do we use to enforce laws?
Dynamic design counters instability from rigid rules
The instability generated by the rigidity of the rules is solved by making the rules
dynamic. Dynamic governance includes short-term and long-term protocols. An ap-
peals process stabilizes short-term cooperation (day to day business, single contract).
Long-term stabilization (year to year, group to group, part of one generation) comes
from legislation, the ability to amend rules—including how the amendments them-
selves are made. For even longer-term stabilization (generation to generation), adher-
ence to transcendental values guides higher-order rulemaking.
Like the dynamic design of the U.S. Constitution discussed at the end of Chapter
T, which stabilized and decentralized the federal hierarchy, we can add dynamic design
to DAO governance to encourage decentralization (or equity or meritocracy or any
other value your organization holds). Larger changes are effectuated by legislative
governance. Subtle changes in reward parameters can be automated to steer the DAO
toward the goals of the group.
Executive short-term governance automated with hard protocols
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 13
Short-term cooperation is regulated by executive governance. This is single-con-
tract policing. Executive governance is regulatory governance—policing. Such regula-
tion should be governed by hard protocols. In other words, in a decentralized organi-
zation, the entire executive branch’s function is automated.
Hard protocols are programmed rules for how the organization performs its func-
tions. For instance, each DAO will automatically share profits with its members, where
the core program will automatically calculate each member’s salary in proportion to
their reputation token holdings relative to the entire group. As a second hard protocol
example, each DAO will determine how reputation creation, distribution, and policing
are handled—for instance the level of approval required before reputation tokens are
granted. As a third example, references to past work-evidence posts will re-valuate
member reputation. Precisely how does a reference reward the author? The many
possible options provide many diverse choices of incentives with which to motivate
DAO members, as will be examined throughout the book. Such hard protocols deter-
mine the programmed reward/punishment structure of each DAO.
In a radically democratic system where power is truly decentralized, each mem-
ber of the organization is in charge of all executive governance, all the time. With the
new tools of information technology, this is now possible.
As described above in the system which generates reputation, each member is
capable of participating in the validation pools. In this way, when the system is work-
ing properly, the executive system is completely automated. Every validation pool on
executive governance should be completely uncontentious, with every vote resolving
unanimously. The only time a member should use their executive power consciously
is when they decide whether to join, i.e., whether they want to run the program which
polices the members or not. After that choice, the hard protocols are entirely algorith-
mic, in the sense that anyone honestly following them will automatically choose the
correct vote, which drives the system to unanimous consensus. The most efficient ap-
plications should be automated, so that honesty is defined as running the algorithm
the organization has agreed upon, unedited.
The only time the members should make a conscious choice when using their rep-
utation tokens for governance, is if they are interested in participating in the legislative
governance process of debating updates to the hard protocols.
Policing is an overhead institution in our traditional economy that centralized per-
sonal defense. Policing as we know it, with permanent, professional, centralized police
bureaucracies funded by taxes, is only about Chh years old. Throughout history there
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

14 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
were decentralized militias and posses, that were based on communal spirit in democ-
racies or family-oriented clans (e.g., Imperial China and feudal Italy6). Governments
always employed specialized military units for policing their citizens, but before the
modern era, there were rarely any standing armies, so policing was intermittent. Aside
from this, marshals and constables were typically paid by courts or individuals with
bounties or retainers.
Starting in Tchh in London, public taxes first funded the Thames River Police to
prevent crime near merchant import properties, following a royal French system that
predated it. Motivated by this success, the TcCU Metropolitan Police Act created the
first modern police force, that is, the first public police bureaucracy for maintaining
social order by investigating general crimes. London passed the act to address the so-
cial upheaval engendered by the industrial revolution. The U.S. later copied this British
innovation in Boston in Tcjc and New York City in TcaV. The point we are stressing, is
that the systems we take for granted as natural are by no means universal nor eternal.
Policing in major cities was not well established until the Tcchs, and towns with less
than Thh,hhh residents didn’t institute salaried police until well into the Chth century.
From a wider, nationwide perspective, outsourcing personal revenge to a pub-
licly-sanctioned, centralized police force led to a leap in efficiency. But this centralized
institution is an obvious vector for corruption. Police exist to fight corruption. They
understand corruption better than others and are the only group sanctioned to di-
rectly address it, so they generally police themselves. Because the centralized bureau-
cracy is hierarchical, there is less transparency than there would be in a decentralized
organization, since only a few people observe what each other person is doing, be-
cause of the limited and static power relations within the org chart.
With the advances of information technology, we can achieve another leap in effi-
ciency and security, by decentralizing and automating policing, giving every member
of a network the power to check every other member on specific behaviors. Bitcoin
does this, e.g., by using error correcting codes and public key cryptography. Whenever
a message is sent in the Bitcoin network, each node in the peer to peer network checks
the message to see that it is properly formatted following Bitcoin protocol before pass-
ing it along in the gossip network. Then each block is hashed many times, and the
nonce is checked to police the claim that the hash lottery winner is the correct block
producer. Finally, each Bitcoin money transfer is cryptographically checked by every
node in the network to verify the transaction sender and recipient accounts are the
correct owners of the private key through digital signature technology.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
6 The Towers of Bologna (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Towers_of_Bologna) are a testament to the
function of clan policing. Each clan had a tower from which they could monitor the town.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 15
Advances in information technology, especially processing and transmission of
data, enables the decentralization of policing of many other DAO functions, giving
each individual in the network the power to check everyone else is following protocol,
through the weighted democratic system of validation pools. We will discuss how
these can be automated in Chapter c, when we discuss banking.
Legislative long-term governance with deliberative soft protocols
In order to adapt to changing market threats and opportunities, DAOs need legis-
lative governance to update their hard protocols. How can we develop new rules or
protocols in a completely decentralized system with anonymous members? We need
to use reputation tokens if we want to achieve complete decentralization, anonymity,
and autonomy. Protocol development is contentious, however. If unanimous consen-
sus is strongly incentivized by every validation pool, our DAOs will degenerate quickly,
as alternative options will not be raised by members with minority opinions for fear
they will lose all reputation tokens. So the basic functioning of validation pools de-
scribed above is inadequate. One more tweak is needed—loosely coupled votes.
The legislative system in a DAO is the process for updating the system—essentially
rolling out new versions of the software all members of the PCP network use. This
legislative process can be broken down into the steps of identifying problems, propos-
ing solutions, deciding between solutions, and deciding how to implement those so-
lutions. The goal is to ensure a stable but active legislative process that responds to
inevitable market changes. The goal is to drive group consensus toward improvements
in the system.
The design should use the reputation system to democratically come to consen-
sus on each of these steps. There are two basic processes: filtering attention to ideas
and then debating the ideas.
First the network needs to harness the power from decentralized networks to ac-
cess information at the edge by filtering their attention to focus on good ideas. New
advances in information technology allow anyone in the network to propose an idea
and to use an upvote type system, like Reddit or Stack Exchange (but with secure and
meaningful reputation), to make good ideas more visible to the group.
Once an idea meets a certain threshold of attention, how do we decide on
whether to implement the idea? How do we guarantee consensus on the protocol
change? This second process is a series of votes before the larger group. This will in-
volve contentious debates on how to develop new regulatory/executive protocols.
Such debates can be held in PCP distributed hash table forums and subjected to a val-
idation pool with loosely-coupled votes. “Loosely-coupled” means reputation tokens
cannot be lost during such validation pools, but can still be staked on contentious
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

16 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
posts to register each owner’s opinion. Loosely coupled validation pools poll the opin-
ion of the group. These polls allow a DAO to gauge member body opinion without
upsetting the balance of power with disruptive token transfers. Such debates encour-
age authentic deliberation on protocol development, in order to T) efficiently explore
the most effective modes of behavior for the organization, and C) ensure authentic
and thorough consensus on all protocols.
In order to encourage development actually happening, i.e., to force consensus
in a timely manner, the debate can gradually move to tightly-coupled votes, where
part or all of the reputation tokens staked on a losing bet will be redistributed to the
winners. When a protocol development debate finally moves to a perfectly tightly-
coupled vote (where all reputation tokens staked on a minority position in a validation
pool are lost), proof is given that the outcome has become precedence, the protocol
becomes non-contentious, and unanimity is ensured. Updates to the consensus algo-
rithm can be made and it will be ensured that everyone in the DAO will download the
new algorithm and run it, or else risk losing reputation tokens when the new protocol
is engaged.
Loosely-coupled voting encourages dissenting opinions. Tightly-coupled voting
guarantees consensus. The process moving from one to the other can be slow or fast
depending on the importance of the debate versus the need to solve the problem
rapidly.
In order to enforce a limit on the time of a debate, the DAO may choose to include
a mechanism where validation pools transition gradually from loosely-coupled voting
to tightly-coupled voting. This transition allows authentic deliberation to take place
during the loosely-coupled voting phase, since divergent views are not punished.
When the debate transitions to the tightly-coupled voting phase, the Tragedy of the
Commons problems of meaningless votes (the “nothing-at-stake problem”) and non-
participation (i.e., free-riding) are avoided, fairly and stably, because members who
do not participate effectively will lose reputation or at least lose opportunities to gain
reputation tokens, whose future value will greatly increase if the protocol improve-
ment successfully attracts fees to the platform.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 17
Binding Non-binding
Rigid Non-contentious Non-contentious
post & tightly-coupled post & loosely-coupled
(E.g., work-evidence (E.g., poll of consen-
post, mandatory plebi- sus on established prece-
scite) dent)
Flexible Contentious post & Contentious post &
tightly-coupled loosely-coupled
(E.g., forcing consen- (E.g., protocol devel-
sus on protocol develop- opment poll, advisory ref-
ment) erendum)
The above table7 categorizes the difference between contentious and non-con-
tentious posts. Non-contentious posts, such as work-evidence posts, will be rigidly po-
liced and binding in the allocation of tokens. Protocols will start as flexible and non-
binding when they are validated as contentious posts. Flexible means members will
not be required to follow initial contentious post protocols subjected to loosely-cou-
pled votes. Non-binding means no reputation tokens are sacrificed for violating the
content of such posts. As consensus is gradually achieved and protocol suggestions
become validated in tightly coupled validation pools, the protocols become rigid and
binding, so that violating them results in loss of reputation tokens.
This process of moving protocol development posts from contentious to non-con-
tentious is meant to address wicked problems,8 which are generally intractable yet
(cid:0)(cid:0)
7 adapted from the EU governance study by Oliver Treib, Holger Bähr, Gerda Falkner, Andreas
Follesdal, & Simon Hix, “Modes of Governance: A Note Towards Conceptual Clarification”, No. N-[X-
[P. Available online https://www.ihs.ac.at/publications/lib/epb.pdf (retrieved b/Pg/P[).
8 Jeffrey Conklin's defining characteristics of a wicked problem are:
1. The problem is not understood until after the formulation of a solution.
2. Wicked problems have no stopping rule.
3. Solutions to wicked problems are not right or wrong.
4. Every wicked problem is essentially novel and unique.
5. Every solution to a wicked problem is a 'one shot operation.'
6. Wicked problems have no given alternative solutions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

18 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
consensus must still be reached in a timely fashion. Therefore, a well-designed
method for encouraging careful deliberation is crucial. Approaches from operations
research (e.g., problem structuring methods9) to social and political science and his-
tory (e.g., Quaker governance, managing a commons10) will help organize the pro-
cess, depending on the particular application and DAO.
The means by which members come to consensus on protocol development is by
following soft protocols. The soft protocols form a socially developed system of rules
that guide members in their conscious decisions—as opposed to hard protocols which
are automatically, algorithmically followed by DAO members to police the value of
work-evidence posts. Such soft protocols are intended to guide members to complete
their deliberations following the commonly agreed upon transcendental values of the
DAO. A healthy DAO will have an effective set of soft protocols for expressing their
common values with regular innovative rule improvements that keep the DAO on an
efficient path toward achieving their goals.
These soft protocols move the DAO from loosely to tightly-coupled votes, from
legislative governance to executive governance with hard protocols.
The collection of currently validated hard and soft protocols comprise the legal
constitution of a DAO. Similar to nation-states, most members of a DAO will never
exhaustively analyze every legal facet of the constitution. So, the UI design is as im-
portant as the constitution to the success of a DAO.
Minority interests are passively protected by decentralizing power as discussed in
Chapter k. To further protect minority interests and ensure stability, DAOs often will
choose to institute certain initial charter rules which are hard coded to require near
unanimous consensus to change, similar to a nation-state’s foundational constitution.
By protecting minorities from the inevitable transient interests of the majority, this
would encourage recruitment of a diverse population of members, increasing the
DAO’s power from the network effect.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
Cf., also, a super wicked problem, which is also relevant. Jeffrey Conklin, Dialogue Mapping :
Building Shared Understanding of Wicked Problems, Wiley Publishing, (Chhk)
9 Jonathan Rosenhead, “Problem structuring methods” in Encyclopedia of Operations
Research and Management Science, jrd ed., Springer Verlag, pp TTkC–TT)C, (ChTj)
10 Ostrom, Elinor, Governing the Commons, Cambridge University Press, (?ZZ[)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 19
Judicial short-term governance with hard and soft protocols
The necessity for appeals is crucial in any business deal. Business contracts are
designed to bring confidence and clarity to the future. While code-is-law smart con-
tracts give a technological leap in efficiency and clarity, with efficient digital self-exe-
cution, their supposed self-regulation will always be ultimately lacking.
The smallest problem is programming bugs. These will always be inevitable, even
with logical advances such as strong, statically typed, purely functional programming
languages such as Haskell, which prevent many of the accidental logical loopholes of
more popular languages. Such problems can be solved with an evolutionary platform
which has a history and good incentive design to encourage continual improvement
in the smart contracts. But business arrangements are becoming more complex. Each
successful modification leads to more opportunities for modifications. With each in-
crease in complexity, the “attack surface” of the business arrangement grows. Mis-
takes will always surface.
Far more importantly, a business contract is a plan for the future. Even if all of the
business parties are well-intentioned, plans fail. When you buy wood to build a shed,
a few pieces from the delivery may be too twisted or knotty to your liking. Do you
terminate the smart contract? Do we build more complex clauses into the contract
handling any eventuality? Perhaps we stipulate how many knots the wood can have
and measure precisely how twisted the wood is allowed to be. How do we build a
smart contract that can judge whether the seller or the buyer is pushing the bounda-
ries?
It doesn’t matter whether the other party is well-intentioned or not. Sometimes
(often) business parties genuinely disagree. For efficiency, disputed contracts need to
be able to be resolved in more sophisticated ways than simply terminating them early.
An impartial third party might be able to resolve the dispute in a more efficient man-
ner. The existence of an efficient and fair appeals process helps give parties the confi-
dence to enter into a contract in the first place. A fair and efficient judicial system, like
insurance, is a catalyst for business that makes the wider economy more liquid and
ultimately, more efficient.
To maintain the efficiency of the self-executing code-is-law smart contract, the
appeals process must be built into the code. In the same way the executive functions
of the DAO are automated with smart-contract-enabled hard protocols, the appeals
process is also automated with hard protocols. Triggers are built into smart contracts
that either party is capable of engaging when a dispute arises. The idea is that the
assets encumbered in the smart contract from the beginning (digital properties includ-
ing currencies, tokenized assets, and reputation tokens) would be frozen and partial
powers of disbursement would be transferred to a third-party arbiter. This judge
would stake their reputation for expert knowledge in the DAO’s protocols and experi-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

20 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
ence with resolving the most common disputes. Then a pre-determined appeals pro-
cess is enacted. The costs of such a process needs to be transparent and negotiated
by the DAO which hosts the smart contract before it is recommended to its customers.
A long history of successful and efficient dispute resolution is necessary before cus-
tomers would gain the faith needed to guarantee the system is worth using from the
beginning.
However, soft protocols are also necessary. Beyond the limits of the typical trans-
action, there will be new events that the DAO must be able to handle. Ideally, these
situations would be vanishingly rare, but even then, it is necessary for the DAO to have
a system in place to give users confidence. The third-party arbiter must sometimes
make a creative decision based on the unique evidence of a novel dispute. In that case,
the arbiter should rely on soft protocols that cleave to the spirit of the law, similar to
how new protocols are created during legislative debate. These soft protocols would
be founded on precedent and guidelines developed over time to steer the DAO toward
its transcendental values. Without such unifying ideals, liminal cases will fragment the
network. Ultimately, transcendental values are always necessary to maintain the sta-
bility of a network, so they are the first thing the DAO should establish.
Network forks and black swans
Finally, there is no way to design a system that can anticipate every future even-
tuality. Conditions change. The group can develop persistent irreconcilable differences
in talents or philosophy or goals. Sometimes the group will be more efficient if com-
peting minorities have the freedom to pursue their own values.
A mechanism for forking needs to be implemented so the value created by the
previous history is not erased. Otherwise the group will arbitrarily downvote the mi-
nority, creating resentment and unnecessary strife. However, forking should always
be discouraged, until the split becomes obvious and detrimental, because of the value
lost in any fork due to the network effect.
The mechanism of forking is illustrated by the Ethereum Classic blockchain fork.
Members who disagree with a new protocol or vote which results in unfair loss of
reputation tokens, can create a new protocol and start their network consensus algo-
rithm from any point in the past, ignoring any new messages sent according to the old
protocol.
Eight qualities of effective decentralized governance and authentic deliberation
Seven general qualities have been identified in modern democratic institutions as
useful for evaluating how effective a governance system is. Upholding the ideals of
decentralization, security, and anonymity while remaining stable in the long run is dif-
ficult, and requires the governance structure of the DAO to encourage a deliberative
democracy. A deliberative democracy by definition values authentic deliberation for
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 21
legitimating consensus on the rules, over the mere act of achieving a majority vote.
The eternally reviewable history of any debate in the forum may provide an ideal
mechanism for achieving the transparency required for authentic consensus, if the
deliberation process satisfies the following eight qualities: T) open, C) balanced, j) con-
scientious, a) dynamic, V) informed, k) binding, )) reviewable, and c) escapable.
Open. An ideal governance process should allow access and power to anyone with
the ability and desire to make positive contributions.
Balanced. Power and profit must be shared fairly. Productive contributions must
be properly rewarded based on the improvement they make to the group. Negative
contributions must be properly punished based on the damage they do to the group.
Arguments should be considered from contrary perspectives. Every member has the
opportunity to post any contentious opinion without fear of reprisals, especially if they
are given the opportunity for anonymity.
Conscientious. Participants should sincerely consider the merits of arguments and
act in the interest of improving the DAO. This cannot be ensured without proper se-
curity and incentivization.
Dynamic. The governance process must be very flexible if it is to adapt to the in-
evitable gaming that will occur in any complex group. In this sense, the ideal is to cre-
ate an evolutionary system where rules are able to continually change to avoid threats
and seize opportunities (micro soft forks). The opportunity to review past actions and
revalue their worth is necessary. Participants must accept that policies and protocols
will eventually change, and so should have a perspective that is open to influence.
Informed. Authentic deliberation is required for the development of the protocols
that will guide the behavior of group members toward productive collaboration. Three
properties are necessary to authentic deliberation: i) as much information as possible
on any subject must be available to all participants, ii) contrary points of view must be
considered, iii) the weight of an opinion should be partially measured by expertise.
Binding. If a rule is broken through incompetence or maliciousness, punishment
through loss of reputation tokens is necessary. Unanimous agreement is therefore the
goal of validation pools for work-evidence posts. In contrast with the desire for the
ability to review past actions, clarity on the finality of decisions is required for stability.
Arguments have the goal of ending in policy.
Reviewable. Governance is a human institution and therefore flawed. The inevi-
tability of mistakes demands a system to redress them. Injustice undermines stability.
Escapable. Network effects show that forking is often damaging to the total value
of any collaboration. So forking should naturally be discouraged. However, persistent,
valid, minority opinions will arise in any collaboration between members with differ-
ent talents. In this case a fork can increase the total value of the individual groups
when they are given the freedom to pursue their separate goals yet still receive the
recognition they deserve from past achievements. For the health of the system there
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

22 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
needs to be a mechanism whereby a carefully considered fork may be stably effectu-
ated. Ideally a symmetric mechanism would be available allowing branches to merge,
perhaps when the larger DAO agrees to recognize the smaller group’s reputation.
Secondly, individual members should have a stable way to exit the system by sell-
ing their reputation tokens for a fair market valuation of the future expected value of
their reputational salary. This is more problematic for reputation than for most other
cryptocurrency tokens, since reputation is less fungible because a token’s value is tied
to the post in which the reputation was created and subject to separate review. But
in principle it could be algorithmically valuated.
In a competitive environment, a governance process for T) an open and c) escap-
able system must be j) conscientious, V) informed, and k) binding in order to promote
the system’s legitimacy. Legitimacy is achieved when members have confidence the
governance process is k) binding and that the process will persist. Legitimacy is at odds
with a a) dynamic structure, since members recognize the process will inevitably
change. In the presence of this tension, stability requires the system to be C) balanced.
The bulk of this chapter is concerned with analyzing how to best ensure the gov-
ernance process is C) balanced and V) informed. The most challenging aspect of good
governance in this context is creating a process that properly rewards participants for
their contributions, and encourages authentic and thorough deliberation on proto-
cols.
The value of deliberation is at odds with time-efficiency and finality. That is, a a)
dynamic, )) reviewable, C) balanced, and V) informed process is at odds with a timely
and k) binding process. The values and needs of any particular DAO will change be-
tween these two extremes throughout its lifetime. The parameters which determine
which extreme is preferred include the length of validation pool timeout, the percent-
age of reputation tokens risked when moving from loosely to tightly-coupled valida-
tion pools, and the reference weight standards.
Design choices match values
By subtly manipulating the reward structure in a DAO, it changes the incentives
in the group, which drives different values. So, if you want to encourage a particular
value, you need to design the governance structure with this in mind. The parameters
determining how power is distributed in the DAO determine the reward structure. The
parameters determine how reputation tokens are created and distributed (in valida-
tion pools) and how their values are reviewed (references and appeals). In this section,
we analyze how manipulating these parameters affects DAO security, stability, proto-
col development, recruitment of members and outside business, and retention.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 23
The goal of good governance design is to engineer the proper incentives so that
independent and self-interested actors will discover that their optimal strategy is to
collaborate productively toward the goals that serve the DAO’s values. Without know-
ing the architects’ intentions beforehand, we should be able to observe the function-
ing of a system at steady state, and guess the original intentions of the architects. Put
another way, it doesn’t matter what the architects’ intentions are, the resulting rules
of the game tell the players what to value. So, if you don’t value what a DAO encour-
ages you to achieve, you shouldn’t join. Put another way, if you know what your values
are, you should design the DAO so that it rewards actions which achieve goals reflect-
ing those values, and punishes actions which hinder such achievements.
In this section we will identify a few choices in DAO governance design and match
them to some basic values that DAOs may choose.11
Connecting values with protocols
We specify several desirable qualities for a DAO and identify several protocols
which encourage each quality.
A general point of view from game theory is that even if a particular behavior is
only slightly favored in each round of a repeated game, it is strongly favored in the
long run and so dominates behavior and outcomes. For example, the house has less
than a T% advantage in blackjack gambling in typical casinos, yet the game is an enor-
mous source of predictable profit, as demonstrated by the ostentatious display of
wealth in Macau or Monte Carlo or Las Vegas. Therefore, changing governance pa-
rameters, only slightly, should be enough to steer long-term member behavior toward
the goals of the DAO.
The basic protocols that determine how power is distributed comes from four
stages:
How workers are chosen for a task.
How members are able to judge a task and how reputation is distributed accord-
ing to the judgment.
How the profits are distributed to the members.
How reputation is reviewed.
First, we explain how different types of distributive norms (i.e., standards for how
power is shared and apportioned and adjusted in a group) may be encouraged with
(cid:0)(cid:0)
11 For a more thorough technical introduction, see Craig Calcaterra, On-Chain Governance of Decen-
tralized Autonomous Organizations, (May P[?Y), available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=g?YYg)L. (Re-
trieved June, P[P[)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

24 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
particular choices of parameters. Next, we discuss how parameters may be set and
how they might evolve for a toy model of a basic company’s life cycle.
Distributive norms
To encourage harmony, careful attention must be paid to the manner in which
power and wealth are distributed in any DAO. Subtle changes in the governance struc-
ture of different DAOs can encourage many types of distributive norms. A distributive
norm is a standard for sharing wealth and power within the organization. Typically, for
small, newly founded DAOs, the standard will be equity to encourage members to join,
but this would change to favor meritocracy, as the DAO matures and wants to encour-
age improvement. Other norms which encourage different behaviors can also be in-
centivized with the appropriate choice of protocols. We explore the effects of param-
eter manipulation on six categories of distributive norms.12 These separate norms
conflict or overlap with each other, but a complex network will typically merge several
different norms to balance the needs of its members.
Distribution Proportional to Input (similar to Legal Equity): 13
Under this distributive norm, members' outcomes should be based on their inputs.
Under this norm an individual who has invested a large amount of input (e.g., time,
money, energy) should receive more from the group than someone who has contrib-
uted little.
This distributive norm will be typical for early DAOs focused on business enter-
prises. This is encouraged with the basic default setup described previously in Chapter
a.j and k.j.
Reputation-weighted random selection of workers.
Reputation-weighted voting and rewards in validation pools.
Reputation-weighted salaries.
Distribution Proportional to Result (Pure Meritocracy): instead of measuring how
much energy the individuals contribute, you measure how their efforts have improved
the organization, and reward them proportionately.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
12 These categories closely follow those described in Donelson Forsyth, Group Dynamics, Xth Ed., pp
gYY – gYZ, Cengage Learning, (P[[b).
13 The term equity has different interpretations in different contexts. Social equity can mean historical
issues are accounted for and so those who were given less in the past are given more in the present.
This overlaps largely, but not entirely, with equity in economics. The goal might be to give members
the power that most allows them to contribute to individual and group welfare, or the goal may be to
level all power. Legal equity can mean many things, including that past powers should be protected,
since different properties or assets are never perfectly fairly interchangeable. Throughout this book
we have used equity in the sense from economic theory, where those with less are given more.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 25
This is encouraged with the basic default setup described above, with the addition
of
Reviewing previous contributions according to analysis of results. Reputation is
augmented or reduced appropriately. (See Chapter U for further discussion of the de-
tails of how reviewing can be automated in a DAO.)
Equal Distribution of Output: Regardless of their inputs, all group members should
be given an equal share of the rewards/costs. This requires that someone who con-
tributes Ch% of the group’s resources should receive as much as someone who con-
tributes kh%.
This can be incentivized by
Random selection of workers according to membership, not reputational hold-
ings.
Equal votes and rewards in validation pools according to membership, not repu-
tational holdings.
Equal salaries for each member.
This is impossible to maintain under the current technology with open access and
privacy, since sockpuppet accounts would be abused. Improvements in ZK proofs and
identity protocols, however, will soon make it possible to efficiently and securely com-
bat such sockpuppet attacks.
Distribution to the Powerful: Those with more authority, status, or control over
the group should receive more than those in lower level positions.
This norm may be achieved by maintaining early users’ majority power by skewing
reputation-weighted power to further advantage those with more reputation in T) ran-
dom selection of workers, C) voting and rewards, and j) salaries. Reputation can be
treated as an artificially scarce resource, continually decreasing how much is minted,
making it more difficult to earn and more valuable as time goes by. This makes the
economy of reputation tokens deflationary.
Distribution from the Powerful (Responsibility): Group members who have the
most should share their resources with those who have less.
Reversing the previous distributed norm may be promoted by instituting several
possible hard protocols which periodically redistribute power by:
Actively transferring tokens.
Passively redistributing tokens by
destroying all reputation tokens as they age (deflates the reputation economy)
increasing the rate of reputation minting as time progresses (inflates the reputa-
tion economy)
Distribution According to Need (Equity in economic theory): Those in greatest
need should be provided with resources to meet those needs. Such individuals should
be given more resources than those in possession, regardless of their input. The goal
is to equalize the power of all members.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

26 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
This norm is promoted using the methods described in Equal Distribution of Out-
put, and Distribution from the Powerful. Again, such a system can obviously be abused
in an open distributed setting through sockpuppet attacks if complicated policing is
not instituted.
A more sophisticated governance structure will switch between norms as the DAO
matures, or in response to market changes, as discussed next.
Company life cycle
Now we illustrate the effect of adjusting three parameters of reward distribution
for encouraging different behaviors in the course of a company’s life cycle. This illus-
trates an implementation of dynamic governance in a decentralized organization
thanks to decentralized information processing.
We use the toy model of the Software Review DAO described in Chapter a. The
three parameters control
how fast new reputation tokens are minted
how much the new reputation tokens reward work versus policing work
speed of debate, as the voting moves from loosely coupled to tightly coupled.
The life cycle of this toy model DAO is split into V stages. It starts with protocol
development from the founders. The next stages are member recruitment, collecting
evidence of expertise, attracting fees, and finally policing work in the equilibrium stage
where the DAO collects the most fees. In practice, there would be more stages which
would repeat and overlap. Further, each division of a company (each expertise) will
not experience the same stages contemporaneously with other divisions.
Stage T: Protocol development
The DAO first must decide how the group is organized, how power will be shared,
what regulatory and legislative governance process will be used. Second, the DAO
specifies how to perform software analysis—what logical and statistical tests are used
on what types of software. Third, protocols for validating another expert’s work are
specified. Such protocol development is encouraged by setting parameters as follows.
Highest. The DAO is not attracting public fees until Stage a, so reputation tokens
are minted in proportion to minimal DoS fees paid entirely by the poster. Therefore,
the ratio of newly minted reputation tokens is set to the highest value for these posts,
to encourage protocol development and reward the founders.
Highest. The percentage of newly minted tokens is shared more with workers pro-
posing new protocols more than those policing the new protocols.
Longest. The small founding group is expected to be highly collaborative so con-
tentious debate posts should move quickly to non-contentious posts, establishing
precedent. However, this is the stage that should require the longest period of time
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 27
to settle differences. I.e., these should be the longest periods of time between loosely
coupled votes to tightly coupled votes, as the protocols move from soft to hard.
Stage C: Talent recruitment.
Once the founding members have established satisfactory reputation holdings,
the DAO will recruit more software evaluator experts, requesting applications to be
posted to their forum for validation. The parameters are set as follows:
jrd highest. The proportion of reputation tokens minted from the minimal DoS
fees paid by the recruit will be set to determine a recruit’s initial reputation holdings
will be high.
The percentage given to policing is Vh%. Policing is important at this stage, and
new members shouldn’t overwhelm founders’ reputation.
Short. Debate on the recruit’s application will move quickly from loosely-coupled
to tightly-coupled to force consensus in a reasonable time period.
Stage j: Collecting evidence of expertise.
Experts advertise their credentials and produce work-evidence posts without col-
lecting public fees—evaluating software for free. They will be posting with minimal
DoS fees, so the parameters are set as follows:
Cnd highest. Members are doing work for free, so newly minted reputation should
be much higher than the DoS fees they pay to participate in the group.
The percentage given for policing is Vh%. New contributions are important at this
stage, but so is policing. New contributions of evidence of expertise shouldn’t over-
whelm founders’ reputation for protocol development.
jrd shortest. Debate is rare and short. Most cases should have been settled by
the protocols developed in Stage T. These posts should move quickly to tightly-coupled
and non-contentious votes.
Stage a: Attracting fees.
Once a body of work is established, this stage requires a new effort to attract
customers, both general public and software companies which send fees. The param-
eters are set as follows:
ath highest. Newly minted reputation is minted in higher proportion to the fees,
to encourage enterprising effort.
The percentage given for policing can be higher than Vh% if protecting the exper-
tise is more important, or lower than Vh% if the DAO is more interested in attracting
customers.
Cnd shortest. Debate should be almost nonexistent, with the only doubt being
whether the fees are corrupting the DAO.
Stage V: Policing work
This is the desired equilibrium stage of the company. Members are attracting fees
from off-chain work for software companies and posting work-evidence to the forum
for validation. The protocol is that a company downloads a template request for work
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

28 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
(RFW) smart contract that the DAO has written and posted to their forum and chooses
several parameters that the DAO has suggested, including the amount of work re-
quested and the fee they are willing to pay. This RFW smart contract selects a random
DAO member for off-chain analysis of their product. This random selection requires
DAO members to have already posted availability stakes using their own availability
smart contract, which encumbers part of their reputation holdings to be engaged for
off-chain work. The randomly selected availability-stake smart contract engages with
the RFW smart contract to allow the selected reviewer to post their review to the
forum for validation, with the fee sent in their name, so that half of the newly minted
reputation tokens are staked in the reviewer’s name. The fee from the software com-
pany is distributed to the DAO in the reputation-weighted salary. The parameters are
set as follows:
Lowest. Newly minted reputation is minted in proportion to the fees. This is the
stage where reputation gets its meaning.
The percentage given for policing is Vh%. This is the standard for maintaining the
value of the reputation. This can be adjusted to respond to market changes to encour-
age policing or working.
Shortest. Debate should be nonexistent, with protocols followed algorithmically.
After the Stage V, the life cycle of the DAO will repeat as innovation research re-
quires new protocol development to keep the organization relevant to the changing
market.
Deciding how and when to move between the stages is a matter of debate. Leg-
islative governance (previous section) is required to develop a system for making
those executive decisions in response to changes in the DAO and the market.
Microdemocracy
Representative democracies in the CTst century are revealing weaknesses in their
age. Delegating one’s vote to a third party without solid information about their ethics
or belief system is unwise. Delegating too much power to an individual or a party nat-
urally leads to corruption as smaller groups advantage themselves above the greater
good. It worked in the Tcth century because social life was much more uniform and
enmeshed on a local geographical level. People spent much more time and energy
communing and monitoring their neighbors. In developed countries today, it is less
likely you will know your neighbors’ names, much less their detailed moral stances
and political views. Without the ability to hold them to account, representatives are
not incentivized to vote for outcomes that reflect the presumptive wishes and needs
of their larger constituency, but for promoting the agendas which benefit their per-
sonal interests and maintaining their own power.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 29
If we wish to delegate power, it should be given to people or groups that you
know and respect, communities you have spent time building without being limited
to geographical proximity or ethnic identity. These issues with representative democ-
racy are eliminated with direct democracy.
Voting incentives and outcomes are different under direct democracy. In Ancient
Athens, for example, citizens voted on any public issues directly on the town’s square.
Public issues as significant as whether to go to war or as mundane as where to build
the next road would be decided by oral acclamation. Incentives, voting outcomes, and
democratic legitimacy are aligned. Democracy is increasingly under threat and needs
upgrades. However, information technology determines the limits of effectiveness
and scope of any system that uses it.
Ancient Greek direct democracy, using the primitive information technology of
the spoken word, was limited to the size of a village. And direct democracy led to sig-
nificant problems. The loudest and most persuasive people held the most sway. This
led to schools devoted to training aristocratic children in manipulative rhetoric, soph-
istry. To combat such manipulation, competing schools trained children in logical tools
for identifying and deconstructing sophistry. And so the Greeks invented analysis and
philosophy, to defend their civilization, and themselves, from lies.14
(cid:0)(cid:0)
14 Like any historical story, this one is also a simultaneous simplification and exaggeration. Aristotle
referred to other experiments, but the first detailed records of Greek democracy are from Athens,
which technically had a representative democracy, though representatives were probably selected
randomly using the kleroterion (see footnote ?Xg).
Though the word “analysis” is etymologically Greek, the idea is certainly as old as civilization, but prob-
ably much older. One of the oldest stories in history is the Babylonian creation myth, The Enuma Elish.
Committed to writing some ?X[[ years before Athenian democracy, the story faithfully recounts the
process of modeling, analysis, and synthesis.
The Babylonian god-king Marduk has an array of weapons he uses to confront the threat of chaos,
particularly magic words (spells), a magic net, and a magic sword. The chaos monster, Tiamat, is ini-
tially represented as the world-circling ocean. Marduk uses his magic words to force Tiamat into the
definite form of a dragon that can be grappled with. His magic net then captures the dragon, he chops
up the captured monster into pieces, and uses those pieces to build the very structure of society and
tools for its use.
The magic words that cohere the ocean of chaos into the definite form of a dragon is the first step of
the modeling process, i.e., choosing the right context. Capturing the dragon with the magic net is the
process of establishing the mathematical existence, uniqueness, and stability of solutions to the
model. Analysis is the process of dividing or cutting apart the model into its basic elements. Synthesis
is the process of forming new structures from these constituent pieces, to gain new forms of control.
Finally, the point of repeatedly telling this story is to give us an example to follow, making us confident
we can reenact its stages at any time in the future when the chaos monster comes back in a new form.
This is extensibility of the model. Cf., Erich Neumann, “The Origins and History of Consciousness”, ?ZXL.
One of Marduk’s many names was “He Who Makes Ingenious Things from Combat with Tiamat”.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

30 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
With the success of direct democracy, groups grew in power and size, beyond the
capacity for people to govern by shouting at the agora, beyond the limit of how many
can fill an amphitheater. As villages grew to cities, direct democracy failed to reflect
the will of the group. There is a limit to how many people can speak, even at an am-
phitheater, because there is a limit to peoples’ patience and endurance. To overcome
the technological limits of information transmission through shouting, democratic so-
cieties devised a system of representative democracy, where a select group of repre-
sentatives—as many as could convene together physically and communicate—would
make decisions on behalf of their larger constituency. People were quite aware of the
natural downsides of democratic delegation, such as corruption, bribery, and biases
before representative democracy started, but the advantages of the network effects
of a larger population were well worth the overhead cost of policing such frictions.
Decentralization disperses concentrated power, delegated power, returning it to
the individual members of the network. Contemporary decentralized information
technology enables direct democracy at scales larger than our modern national rep-
resentative democracies. Contemporary technology no longer limits our ability to
communicate to the number of people who can fit in a room and patiently wait for
their turn to speak. With the advances in information transmission, storage, and es-
pecially information processing we can now register our opinions on the smallest mat-
ters, store them for asynchronous consideration, and broadcast our responses glob-
ally. The power of our individually owned computers, with millions of cycles per
second, allows us to process this information using complicated algorithms without
relying on a centralized bureaucracy to analyze the information. The limits of our per-
ception make it seem as though our devices can continually post our votes on the most
minute concerns. They continually signal where we are, what we are buying, and what
our heartrate is. Our devices can signal our will on the most minute matters, creating
a new level of direct democracy. Microdemocracy.
Microdemocracy and proper incentive design can increase the voter participation
that undermines representative democracies. Experimentation with electronic forms
of voting allows new forms of allocating votes to prioritize societal issues for each
voter.15 The more important a given societal issue is for a given voter, the more effort
(cid:0)(cid:0)
15 Quadratic voting, for example, allows a first glimpse of the innovations that are possible with micro-
democratic systems. In this scenario each voter is periodically allocated a limited number of vote to-
kens. These tokens may be spent to vote on any issue the voter is concerned with during the period.
If you allocate more vote tokens, you have a bigger influence in the outcome than someone who allo-
cates less, signifying the priority you place on the issue. Lalley and Weyl argue the ideal way to count
the votes is quadratically. That is, you can spend ? token for one vote, but L of your tokens are needed
to register P votes, Z tokens for g votes, and so on. They argue this inhibits negative effects that harm
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 31
or power the voter will allocate to the issue. For example, as more and more people
become aware of the climate crisis faced by humanity, they will increasingly allocate
their votes on issues that reflect their increasing awareness. Change is realized as peo-
ple allocate their votes prioritized by their preferences and awareness. Moreover, part
of the power of this microdemocratic approach derives from the higher levels of
knowledge a given voter has on a particular issue that is evidenced by the voters’ pro-
portional attention. It is less likely that voters will engage with issues they know rela-
tively little about. The discovery of the will of the electorate is improved, and previ-
ously disenfranchised constituencies are empowered.
Microdemocracies must address the problem of the Tragedy of the Commons. In
microdemocratic systems, individual voters act independent of the totality of voters
according to their self-interest. Acting for their own self-interest may be contrary to
the common good of all voters. Without controls, some self-interested voters may be
depleting or spoiling resources they share with the rest of society, such as the envi-
ronment or public goods. Similarly, majority rule may mean discrimination against the
minority. As discussed above, The Tyranny of the Majority happens naturally, and
must be policed consciously in a microdemocracy. Perhaps the best way to protect
minorities is to make more of them, by promoting the natural diversity of interests in
humanity by empowering individuals. Rights protecting minorities must be enshrined
in any overarching rules, and protected by nurturing values which respect diversity
and individuality.
A key advantage of a microdemocracy is the speed with which it can enact change.
In the early ChChs, representative democracies are largely slow and inflexible because
their constitutional and legal infrastructure were designed decades or centuries be-
fore contemporary information technology was invented. Large-scale political change
typically depends on the election of a new government after, typically, around a years.
By contrast, microdemocratic voting would provide a more immediate feedback sys-
tem between voters and their representatives. Because decentralized technology en-
ables the transparent and incorruptible tallying of votes, nearly instantaneously, vot-
ing can be more dynamic and incremental and political will can be exercised more
directly.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
other systems. Tyranny of the Majority results from one-person-one-vote schemes, but this is inhib-
ited if one person can register their greater concern by devoting more of their voice on one subject.
In this way minorities can override majorities on issues they are most concerned with. At the same
time, quadratic voting inhibits the Tyranny of the Interested Party, as it limits those with the greater
concern on subject from dominating the group, because their megaphone is muffled by the require-
ment of expending more and more vote tokens to register each new vote.
Steven Lalley & Glen Weyl, “Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism Design Can Radicalize Democracy”,
American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, Vol. ?, No. ? (P[?Y)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

32 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
Decentralized technology can improve voting technology in representative de-
mocracies. Voting technologies in existing representative democracies were woefully
outdated at the beginning of the CTst century. Since the Chhh U.S. Presidential elec-
tion16 which necessitated reexamination of punch holes in paper voting cards, exist-
ing voting systems with analog or paper technology have been proven suboptimal. But
the problems with existing voting systems do not end with technology. Redistricting
or gerrymandering, that is, manipulating the boundaries of a voting district to affect
voting outcomes, and other issues such as election financing show that voting and the
democratic institutions built to facilitate basic tenets of representative democracies
have been under attack and require updates. Decentralized technologies have tech-
nological features that can provide solutions. But, such solutions also require political
will. For example, voting on a public blockchain that overcomes the trilemma of block-
chains (decentralization, scaling, security) may become a core application of the tech-
nology. Decentralized technologies have the capacity to change the incentive design
for voting which helps address some of the dangers presented by existing internet
voting. And computer security is strong enough to maintain privacy, yet allow trans-
parent, publicly auditable, records through zero-knowledge proofs as demonstrated
by Bitcoin’s |Thh billion decentralized protocols.
Decentralized technologies provide inherent microdemocratic features that can
help instantiate microdemocratic principles and processes in society. Decentralized
technology enables smaller scale democratic decisions at unprecedented scale. In the
early CTst century, internet platform businesses and social media companies inaugu-
rated new forms of voting. The “Like” button, while deeply flawed in its incentive de-
sign and voting-related outcomes, inaugurated a new form of voting on social out-
comes and, at the same time, trained the voting public to engage more directly with
voting-related outcomes. Decentralized technologies create extensions of these forms
of more direct democratic votes. Unlike their centralized predecessors, decentralized
technologies, for the first time in history, enable improved incentive designs that help
overcome the insufficiencies in voting outcomes of representative democracies. As
voting pools in decentralized systems increase, deepen, and diversify, they can be-
come supplemental voting systems that help overcome the lack of legitimacy and im-
prove representative democracies.
The printing press taught the people how to read. The internet is teaching people
how to write. Decentralized technology will teach people how to vote.
Of course, such upgrades to existing representative democracies will require es-
tablishment governmental support—the existing representatives must vote to change
(cid:0)(cid:0)
16 Bush v. Gore, Xg? U.S. ZY (P[[[).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 33
the structure that brought them to power—which is dubious. Again, large decentral-
ized organizations are very stable. It’s more likely that organic advances in decentral-
ized networks will make the established institutions irrelevant until they are bypassed
and ignored. This is not a problem if we build all the hard-earned social protections
into the new decentralized networks. That can only happen if we consciously work to
protect these historical advances of civilization while promoting the diversity of hu-
manity by empowering individuals.
Summary
The goal of this chapter was to introduce governance design and analyze the con-
sequences of different protocols for promoting the chosen values and goals in any
particular DAO. The goal of these solutions is to make it easy to participate for the
maximal number and types of users throughout the greatest variation of DAO goals.
Users should not need to be technological authorities to navigate the system and add
value. In the vast majority of cases, for the vast majority of users, the user interface
(UI) will hide all of the details discussed. An intuitive UI can recommend posts and
allow users to quickly evaluate post after post, staking varied amounts of their limited
reputation in varied degrees of tightly- and loosely-coupled votes. How the system
actually counts the votes and determines the reward structure for references will de-
termine what values and goals are promoted in any particular DAO. Though the re-
ward structures will be openly available for any DAO, the members will soon become
experts on how to effectively navigate the system without poring over the technical
details, merely from repeated use.
Weighted democracy is crucial for solving the Tragedy of the Commons and Tyr-
anny of the Majority problems. For example, Dr. Craig should have more weight than
the average person in the decision on which new math classes to run in the Fall at
Metropolitan State University. Craig’s vote is not equal to your vote, Dear Reader.
Similarly, the average Metro State student should have more weight than the average
Minnesotan on this issue, but less weight than a math major’s vote. Finally, the aver-
age American should have more weight than the average South American. In our im-
agined perfect system, the average South American would still be able to register their
opinion about what classes should be offered in Minnesota, as long as they are inter-
ested in the subject and willing to stake their reputation to influence the vote in a
positive way. But their opinion would have much less power than a professor who
works at the school. One person one vote is not the right way to govern on every issue.
This may seem like fantasy, where a global weighted democracy could register
such disparate opinions on globally trivial details and filter that information down to
meaningful governance, but the technology is already in place. People already curate
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

34 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Governance
valuable information on supranational platforms with their reputation. With more
than Th million global users, Stack Overflow is a centralized Web C.h company that
leverages the power of decentralization through the internet to build knowledge ba-
ses for many subjects including computer science and other technical disciplines that
is relied on by many practicing experts. Similar to Reddit’s reputational system, users’
reputation grows in proportion to their contributions through questions, answers, and
comments in proportion to others’ upvotes and downvotes.
The only thing missing is that the system doesn’t share power with their users.
Since Stack Overflow and Reddit and Facebook and Twitter and all the other successful
social media sites are privately, centrally owned, their governance processes—their
algorithms for distributing reputation—are necessarily opaque. This is because the in-
centives are not properly aligned for their users to police their own reputation against
gaming. Some of the idealistic users would certainly try to police the site from sock-
puppet accounts and malevolent groups if they were given more power in a transpar-
ent system. But the millions who are not financially invested in the system would not
have the proper motivation to fight against the few hackers who could exploit the
system for profit using the same information technology processing abilities we pro-
pose to empower all users with. When it’s more profitable to game the system than
protect it, the centralized organization needs to keep the underlying protocols opaque
to maintain the system’s integrity. But that type of centralized regulation is not as
dynamic and responsive as a decentralized governance process would be if it empow-
ered its users to develop protocols to fight gaming.
We have the power, now, to track and audit such seemingly trivial choices as what
a pseudonymous Bolivian thinks about the class offerings in the math department of
a university on another continent. We have the processing power to weight those
opinions based on their earned reputation, and to control how they effect the ultimate
decisions. We have the computational power to institute sophisticated weighted-
democratic governance protocols on a global scale for trivial matters, to fairly and ef-
ficiently adjust reputational power to encourage productive cooperation.
Eric Raymond famously said, “Love doesn’t scale.” He was arguing that capitalism,
not socialism, is necessary for giving people the proper economic incentives to keep
business working together to supply larger society with the resources necessary to
survive. He was referring to how we may behave altruistically toward our family and
friends, but when it comes to economic decisions on the global stage, you can’t count
on a democracy to make decisions that benefit all when local individuals could profit
at their expense. One-person-one-vote loses coherence as it scales up to a global de-
mocracy.
Love doesn’t scale, but reputation does. Weighted democracy, properly meas-
ured and aggregated, can scale from valuating expertise on a local level to expertise
on global issues. If you find the right balance, if the valuations of reputation tokens
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

Chapter ) – Governance (cid:0) 35
between distinct DAOs find the proper equilibrium through market freedom, the var-
ious reputations can achieve coherent meaning for making decisions at the global
level. The math required is basic arithmetic. The elementary logic is more than a,hhh
years old. Contemporary information technology can handle the demands of global
decentralized governance. We simply need sufficient investment in transparency and
democracy and individual autonomy—in decentralization—to pull it off.
Bibliography
Formating example:
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782214

