Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
1
Historical Sketches of Centralization vs.
Decentralization
By Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal
Abstract
Chapter ) of the book explores the historical foundations of decentralized structures,
starting with early hominids through Imperial China and the American Revolution.
The primary goal of the chapter is to witness the central-decentral dichotomy in its
evolutionary context to understand more fully their effects on organizations. The
chapter evaluates the stabilizing effect of decentralization in context and contrasts it
with the greater temporary effectiveness of centralization. History shows how dy-
namic societies have always been. This dynamic perspective illustrates what freedom
and power humanity has to reorganize social networks.
The book can be accessed here:
https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-Struc-
ture/dp/3110673924/
and here:
https://www.degruyter.com/view/title/569051
Chapter 9. Historical sketches of centralization vs.
decentralization
Each advance in information technology has led to an improvement in humanity’s
ability to organize.
It is easy to observe the effect of these advances when power is centralized: you fol-
low the choices of the central leader. Most recorded history is about centralized hi-
erarchies. The “Great Man” version of historiography records the history of the deci-
sions of kings and queens. It’s a popular perspective for historians, because it is
easier than explaining how the more important story is the litany of changes in “little
people’s lives”. The psychological state of Henry VIII is endlessly debated, even
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

2 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
though changes in barrel makers’ techniques and their trade organization better ex-
plain why we live the way we do today. The individual is easier to recognize and re-
late to than abstract decentralized trends that often are unnoticed even to the peo-
ple living through them.
Advances in organization mean we can cooperate more efficiently in our use of en-
ergy, making us more materially wealthy. The progress of information technology co-
incides with the progress of human power over their environment. The more effi-
cient our system of communication, the larger the group that can be organized, the
more powerful and efficient the group.
Groups cooperate most efficiently when there are clear rules for cooperation. Hier-
archies are the most efficient pattern for creating a control structure in a group.
They are used in large and small scales from an army to an emergency phone tree in
an elementary school. They form naturally when power structures emerge as people
differentiate themselves into more and less powerful members of a group. If compe-
tition exists, for instance, then people come to be arranged in a hierarchy. If the
competition continues long enough, if there is enough organizing energy, the natural
end result is a complete tree structure.1
As a hierarchy organically arranges itself, redistributing power and wealth via com-
petition, an exponential pattern of power centralization emerges. This is referred to
as the Matthew principle, where “the rich get richer and the poor get poorer”.2 Es-
sentially, someone who is more powerful is better able to secure more of any power
available. They’re more aware of whatever power is available, they have better con-
nections and resources for accumulating power, and they’re better practiced at ac-
quiring it. As the hierarchy becomes more entrenched, this exponentially distributed
power structure crushes those at the bottom, leaving minimal power and wealth for
the vast majority of people. The discontent of the majority is the first destabilizing
force of a centralized organization.
At the same time the very success of the hierarchy may lead its power relations to
become more rigid. This rigidity can become brittle when power relations become
(cid:0)(cid:0)
1 This natural evolution of a complex organized structure is the basis for the confusion trapping many
conspiracy theorists. We are not saying there are no conspiracies, in fact the list of genuine conspira-
cies includes every historical revolution (see also https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contract_killing#No-
table_cases Retrieved L/))/MN). However there is no need to explain events by positing the existence
of extremely powerful actors who control history. Power organizes naturally to make history without
guidance. “The main thing that I learned about conspiracy theory, is that conspiracy theorists believe
in a conspiracy because that is more comforting. The truth of the world is that it is actually chaotic.
The truth is that it is not The Iluminati, or The Jewish Banking Conspiracy, or the Gray Alien Theory.
The truth is far more frightening. Nobody is in control. The world is rudderless.” ―Alan Moore
2 This principle is named after the passage in the New Testament Book of Matthew: “For unto every
one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that hath not shall be taken
away even that which he hath.” Matthew M[:M\, King James Version. The same principle leads to Zipf’s
law, Price’s law, exponential growth, unrestricted population growth, compound interest, or econo-
mies of scale.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 3
entrenched with secular laws. Under a codified system of logic-based rules, the letter
of the law tends to override the spirit of the law. Rigid hierarchies are unstable and
inevitably fall, eroded from internal corruption or novel external challenges that the
hierarchy is not flexible enough to adapt to. These are the second and third factors
that explain why centralized organizations are unstable. Rigid competitive hierar-
chies with secular laws face internal corruption as members’ optimal strategy is to
push the rules to the limit. From the outside, any change in the problems the group
faces can find the hierarchy unready to face the new challenge.
This explains the sequence of revolutions throughout history. Both the extreme
power inequality and the rigidity of centralized hierarchies historically have inevita-
bly led to collapse. Rigidly centralized organizations are seen as unstable on a histori-
cal scale, compared with decentralized organizations.
Ancient Egypt and Imperial China were relatively stable for millennia despite strong
political hierarchies. What distinguished these civilizations from the many others
that rose and fell around them? Their stability was due to protocol decentralization.
Humanity’s ability to organize in more sophisticated networks has advanced along-
side improvements in information technology. Information technology progressed
from the beginnings of symbolic language (ideas and beliefs, mysticism, ideas about
ideas) and proto-writing (probably before homo sapiens evolved), then written sym-
bols (Sumeria & Egypt, ca. YZZZ years ago), then mass printing (especially in China,
which used stone rubbings in [ZZ BC and relatively durable clay moveable type in
))ZZ AD; later in Germany with the improved metal moveable type in )^^Z by the
goldsmith Gutenberg). The introduction of electronic information technology with
the telegraph brought humanity to the contemporary era, with global light-speed in-
formation communication (Europe, America, and Asia were connected before )_‘Z).
In broad terms, information technology is broken into three components: infor-
mation storage, information processing, and information transmission. Memory,
computation, and communication. These three components are not clearly sepa-
rated. For example, how you store information in memory determines how effi-
ciently and effectively you can process and transmit information. Your means of pro-
cessing determines how and what you store in memory. How information is stored
determines how it can be transmitted and shared. How you store and share infor-
mation determines how it can be filtered and processed.
Developments in information technology accompanied the rise and eventual down-
fall of empires. In Imperial China the fantastic success of the hierarchy in fostering
economic cooperation gradually made its bureaucracy more rigid. China invented
the printing press and used it to centralize power—politically with uniform edicts
and economically with the first printed money. Eventually, the hierarchy couldn’t re-
spond to internal corruption and external threats such as Mongolian, Manchurian,
and Western imperial invaders.
Europe started its own printing presses a few centuries later. Instead of using the
press to centralize power like the Chinese Empire did, Europe’s use of the printing
press greatly decentralized knowledge. The resulting cultural transformation led to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

4 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
the collapse of the centralized powers. The highly hierarchical Catholic Church lost its
hegemony in Europe in the face of the Protestant Reformation, which may be at-
tributed to the dissemination of bibles to the public. Eventually the entire European
aristocracy collapsed and was replaced by greater power decentralization with de-
mocracy. But the decentralized organization of scientists, which has thrived since the
advent of the printing press, has been remarkably stable, unified by an adherence to
the value of objectively verifiable truth.
In this chapter we explore these ideas starting with early hominids through Imperial
China and the American Revolution. The primary goal is to witness the central-de-
central dichotomy in its evolutionary context to understand more fully their effects
on organizations. We will witness the stabilizing effect of decentralization in context
and the greater temporary effectiveness of centralization. The “unstoppable power
of decentralization” is threatened by unregulated competition for profits, but can be
maintained in the most extreme circumstances by a secure and meaningful reputa-
tional system. Analyzing modern Western democracies, the largest DAOs ever as-
sembled, shows networks of members with diverse values can be united with proto-
col centralization, and its destabilizing effect can be ameliorated by power-
decentralization through dynamic design of governance. In the long run, organiza-
tions are held together by their transcendental values.
A secondary goal of the chapter is to combat our historical myopia. There is a natural
inclination to accept the fallacy of Uniformitarianism, the idea that the institutions
and cultures we have today are natural and have always been this way, and will al-
ways be this way. History teaches us how dynamic societies have always been. Revo-
lutions demark the regular switch between the forces of centralization and decen-
tralization in power, different legal protocols, and different ideals. This dynamic
perspective helps us better understand what freedom and power we have to reor-
ganize our social networks.
From Hominids to Imperial China
Prehistory of information technology
Centralization and decentralization are two qualities of power. A simplified, cartoon
model of centralized power would be a static org chart at a corporation. This hierar-
chical pyramid structure leads to fewer and fewer leaders at each level with an ulti-
mate leader at the top.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 5
Such powerful centralization was not universal throughout history. Anthropological
theories argue the origin of kingship, but the very tentative consensus from the ar-
chaeological record indicates the type of absolute rulers attended by a bureaucracy
enforcing their rule did not exist much before YZZZ years ago. The Tomb U-j at Aby-
dos about ee[Z B.C. identifies the first ruler of Dynasty Z as (possibly) the pharaoh
Menes who unified Upper and Lower Egypt. There were certainly smaller kingdoms
before that, but we have no earlier evidence of large bureaucracies. Before Menes,
local leaders exerted more or less power over tribes since before the existence of
homo sapiens. Pack hierarchies are evident in many species of social animal.
Before large scale kingship, the decentralized collection of warlords exercised far less
centralized power, and humanity’s relatively weaker ability to organize meant we
controlled measurably less energy.3 Technological evolution in symbolic language,
and later, writing, were crucial ingredients necessary for the development of the
strong centralization that attends kingship. The theory of behavioral modernity pos-
its the idea that homo sapiens made advances in information technology on the
mental level with improved language YZZ,ZZZ years ago, leading to sophisticated
human organization around YZ,ZZZ years ago.4 The theory claims abstract language
(cid:0)(cid:0)
3 For an innovative perspective on the historical progress of humanity’s technological ability to harness
energy, see Vaclav Smil, Energy and Civilization: A History, The MIT Press (MN)a)
4 The dating is still controversial, and some researchers argue these individual behaviors may be more
than bNN,NNN years old. Francesco D'Errico, "The Invisible Frontier: A Multiple Species Model for the
Origin of Behavioral Modernity", Evolutionary Anthropology, )M (b), pp. )LL–MNM, MNNg. It is argued
that the effects are more consistently visible in the archaeological record after a watershed moment
around [N,NNN years ago when people were first able to organize in stable groups of a size large
enough to maintain complex traditions. Adam Powell, et al., “Late Pleistocene Demography and the
Appearance of Modern Human Behavior”, Science gMb, )M\L, MNN\. Available online at
http://doc.rero.ch/record/M)Ng\g/files/PAL_EbbN).pdf (Retrieved i/MM/MN)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

6 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
led to improved abstract thinking, planning depth, and symbolic behavior such as art.
With these new information technology tools (transmission, storage, and processing
of information), people were capable of more complex cooperation, leading to more
sophisticated societies, which eventually led to the first political hierarchies.
These early societies which emerged YZ,ZZZ years ago are what we would crudely
refer to as cavemen. They are distinguished from earlier groups of hominids inas-
much as they left a record of organized coordination that is maintained continuously
throughout generations. These cavemen invented tally sticks and cave paintings. Be-
sides words and ideas themselves, these tools are the most primitive information
storage technology known. The Lebombo bone, dated to ^Z,ZZZ BC, is the first
known example of a tally stick. Tally sticks were used even into the [Zth century in
illiterate communities in Europe and Asia, to record economic transactions and own-
ership using notches on a piece of wood. The Chauvet cave holds the earliest picture
drawings that have been found, dated to eZ,ZZZ BC. They record information on lo-
cal animals and the earliest known religious objects.
Particularly important is the symbolic thought necessary for abstracting the notions
of gods and sacrifice and worship that would lead to the centralization of thought
and coordination of action necessary to unify large populations beyond local kinship
groups. Such universal spiritual beliefs give people the harmony required to create
institutional order and eventually practical secular laws.
In fact, sacralized law has been shown to generate more stable and successful insti-
tutions than secular beliefs. Sosis explains “religious communes are more likely than
secular communes to survive at every stage of their life course.”5 One mechanism
proposed to explain the discrepancy is costly-signaling theory. The idea is that sacri-
ficing to a religion signals commitment to the group which solves the free-rider prob-
lem. This falls under the field of evolutionary psychology of religion, which is obvi-
ously quite contentious. There is a more basic mechanism which explains the success
of spiritual values for unifying groups.
From an abstract perspective, transcendental values are more stable unifiers than
formal secular rules. The Folk Theories of Game Theory (see Chapter ^) illustrate the
obvious point that it is not possible to construct a perfect secular constitution, i.e., a
complete set of static rules, that will account for all positive and negative behaviors
to permanently govern a group profitably. The Folk theories demonstrate that how-
ever the rules are written, strategies exist which follow the rules, yet profit the indi-
vidual at the expense of the group. (See, for example, the Nobles vs. Peasants game
in Section ^.[.e.) When a law is written down rigorously, specifying precisely what is
acceptable and not acceptable, people are obligated by competition to find the most
efficient behavior possible within those rules. Such behavior is often located right on
(cid:0)(cid:0)
5 Richard Sosis, “Religion and Intragroup Cooperation: Preliminary Results of a Comparative Analysis
of Utopian Communities” (PDF). Cross-Cultural Research. SAGE Publishing. gb ()), MNNN.Available
online at https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/b[Na/edd\dae[[e\MgaeeN\MbNaLibgaf\Libbibf.pdf Re-
trieved[/)L/MNMN
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 7
the boundary of what is permissible. This erodes stability as excessive effort is then
required on policing the laws. On the other hand, a transcendental value by defini-
tion is not rigorously formalizable. When people organize around an eternally unob-
tainable ideal without clear boundaries, they are less likely to probe the boundaries
of what is acceptable.
A more traditional spiritual tradition explains a very simple and practical method for
uniting disparate members in a large stable community. An ascetic Orthodox monas-
tery on Mount Athos in Greece has a continuous tradition from at least _ZZ AD. How
have they managed to unite devotees from different cultures? They’ve maintained
an open policy for new members (any Orthodox male is accepted regardless of na-
tional origin) yet they have survived for )[ZZ years during numerous wars and
changes in government. This cenobitic (communal but hierarchical) monastic order’s
solution is: pray together, work together, and eat together.6
We will borrow this strategy as a plan for harmonizing decentralized autonomous or-
ganizations (DAOs) using blockchain and other P[P internet technology in Chapter
^.e. An ideal DAO has an open membership policy for any anonymous person from
any culture on the planet. How can they maintain harmony? They must share a tran-
scendental value, work toward a common purpose (even if it’s simply profit), and
share fairly in the spoils of the work.
Protocol centralization in the law
The earliest historical evidence of law is found in Egypt. Their system was closer to
our sense of holding to the spirit of the law instead of the letter of the law. The re-
markable stability of Egyptian society, for more than eZZZ years, testifies to how
successful prioritizing transcendental values is over formal rules.
The Ancient Egyptians had a strong sense of nationalism, believing that Egyptians
were the best people because they had the best model of behavior deriving from the
best possible spiritual ideals. (This is naturally mirrored in nearly every national iden-
tity; the Chinese and Romans are two other exemplars of such attitudes, arguably
because they have had the most successful empires.) The Ancient Egyptian term
Maat encompasses this collection of ideals, meaning roughly truth, balance, order,
harmony, law, morality, and justice. Maat is also the goddess who upholds and po-
lices society according to these ideals. She also regulates the stars, the seasons, and
even the other gods.
Though Ancient Egypt was politically centralized in the sense that the pharaoh was
the supreme hierarch, it was protocol decentralized in the sense that people were
not held to explicit formal rules and a legal constitution. The application of the law
was vague and applied by autonomous priest-judges who were bound by their crea-
(cid:0)(cid:0)
6 Graham Speake , Mount Athos: Renewal in Paradise, Yale University Press, MNNM.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

8 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
tive interpretation of Maat, instead of precedent and formal rules. Though the Egyp-
tians had developed writing on papyrus by [lZZ BC, and therefore had the technol-
ogy to implement formal permanent rules, they avoided this type of protocol cen-
tralization and enjoyed the longest period of stability of any empire in history.
Experiments with letter-of-the-law, protocol-centralized legal systems were far less
stable in nearby Mesopotamia. Around [mZZ BC, cuneiform writing which repre-
sented syllables was invented. This was a great leap in information storage and
transmission, using abstract symbols pressed into clay (pictogram systems are about
e centuries older).
We don’t have a record of formally prescribed laws until about lZZ years later when
King Urukagina’s code was first set down in [eZZ BC, five centuries before the fa-
mous Code of Hammurabi. The stone cone on which the Urukagina code is printed is
the perfect symbol of protocol centralization. The cone begins by criticizing previous
rulers “since time immemorial, since life began”7 for undermining the original di-
vinely-decreed code. Urukagina’s laws are reforms of previous failed Mesopotamian
kings’ style of centralized government, which led to abuses of those at the bottom of
the hierarchy. The reforms revoked the centralized control of many industries: “He
removed the head boatman in charge of the boats. He removed the head shepherd
in charge of the asses and sheep. He removed the head fisherman from the fishing
places. He removed the silo supervisor from control over the grain taxes of the guda-
priests.... He removed the palace official in charge of collecting the tax.” The code
ends with the first legal recognition of basic equality and freedom: King Urukagina
“freed the inhabitants of Lagash from usury, tax debt, hunger, theft, murder, and sei-
zure” of their property and persons. “Widows and orphans were no longer at the
mercy of the powerful.”
Urukagina’s rule lasted only eight years before he lost his brittle centralized king-
dom, whose laws were set in stone. The next evidence we have of a legal code
comes eZZ years later, the Code of Ur-Nammu. This gives the first evidence of a legal
text containing formal logic. For example, Law #e[ reads:
e[. IF a man had let an arable field to another man for cultivation AND he did NOT
cultivate it, turning it into wasteland, THEN he shall measure out three kur of barley
PER iku of field.8
This law holds all the mental technology needed to build today’s digital computer-
programmed legal smart contracts on blockchains. The formal theoretical pattern is
the logical conditional IF (violation) THEN (punishment). Moreover, this law uses the
logical operators, AND and NOT. By serially chaining these three functions together,
the most complex business logic possible, for organizing any imaginable business ar-
rangement, can be contained in a single legal contract. With the final addition of the
mathematics of addition (three) and division (PER) at the end of the law, the people
(cid:0)(cid:0)
7 Jerrold S. Cooper, Clay Cones La \.) Presargonic Inscriptions, The American Oriental Society, New
Haven, Connecticut, ()\Li)
8 Ibid. Capitalization mine.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 9
of Ur demonstrated all the logical sophistication required to use our modern smart
contracts four millennia later.
These experiments in protocol centralization continued in the West with periodic
revolution every century, culminating in the development of Roman law from ^YZ BC
to Y[m AD. The use of Latin phrases in contemporary courtrooms in the West attests
to the influence of the system of Roman law until the present day. However, the reg-
ular changes in the languages and nations using these laws in the intervening centu-
ries display their failure to maintain stability alone.
China and Europe
Psychological centralization in China and decentralization in Europe
The primary staple crops of Europe and China have influenced their respective cul-
tural centralization. People in Europe farm primarily wheat and live in lands which
couldn’t support the same population density of China, where they farm primarily
rice.
Wheat crops require individuals to harness animal and machine power. People work
the land alone, behind an ox and plow. The basic European unit of society separated
into individual family farms with large distances between neighbors, because wheat
requires less than half the energy to cultivate compared with rice.
Rice farming requires intensive use of the land. Periodically through the year a large
number of people are required to unite to cooperate in the planting and harvesting.
As opposed to wheat, which is nourished by rainfall and sunshine, rice requires man-
ual transplantation and regularly maintained irrigation. These major tasks are done
by hand without the use of animals or machinery. It requires many people working
closely together. It requires the community to come together for the job at a mo-
ment’s notice, whenever the weather and the crop dictate. You need to rely on your
neighbor. Communal harmony is essential for survival.9 Value and protocol centrali-
zation attends these communal forces. Asian communities tend to be more geo-
graphically, protocol, and value centralized than European communities.
Another contributor to the cultural bifurcation between East and West is language.
European languages tend to be highly analytic. The many Chinese languages include
some of the most synthetic languages on Earth—especially Mandarin, the dominant
language of China. An analytic language separates each variation on an idea into var-
ious words. For example, there are literally hundreds of different words and phrases
(cid:0)(cid:0)
9 For a more nuanced assessment of the differences than the oversimplification presented here, see
Shihu Hu and Zhiguo Yuan, Commentary: ‘Large-scale psychological differences within China explained
by rice vs. wheat agriculture’, Frontiers in Psychology, i:bL\ (MN)[).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

10 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
that parse the idea of “big” in English.10 Synthetic languages unite several ideas with
the same word. For example, the Chinese word ma can stand for hundreds of diverse
meanings for which English has completely different words, such as horse, mother,
toad, hemp, wipe, scold, dragonfly, ant, grasshopper, agate, etc., etc., etc. Still, the
English language is far more analytic and separating than that difference conveys,
because each word in English can take on many different meanings depending on
the tone used when speaking—anger, joy, disgust, sarcasm, etc. At the opposite end
of the spectrum, Mandarin is a tonal language, meaning you must control your tone
to speak the word. This means there is less possibility to inflect the meaning of the
word with how you say a word. For instance, the Chinese famously do not use sar-
casm. Word order in English is extremely important for generating new meanings. A
common exercise for teaching adverbs in elementary school is to pick any basic sen-
tence and insert the word “only” in different places in the sentence. Try it on the
sentence, “She told him that she loved him.”
The psychological ramifications are that it is easier to draw distinctions in an analytic
language like English, whereas it is more natural to come to consensus using a syn-
thetic language like Mandarin. It is natural for English speakers to have a more con-
tentious culture, while Mandarin is more likely to evolve with a culture which en-
courages harmony.
Both the farming systems and the languages reflect the personal differences ob-
served between European and Chinese societies. Europeans tend to prize individual-
ity, while Chinese value group harmony. This is naturally also reflected in their styles
of government.
Europeans have built systems that encourage an atmosphere where people can sta-
bly and predictably confront each other in debate; they set up arenas for conflict
with pre-assigned end points, after which participants are forced to consensus, fol-
lowing the vote of the majority under democracy, or the will of the judge or king un-
der monarchy.
Chinese systems of government encourage group harmony. Conflict is diffused
through slower processes of group consensus through clan hierarchical judgments.
Adherence to the authority of family hierarchy prevents conflicts from escalating as
judgments from any level higher than the parties involved resolve the issue. The
most contentious issues may move to higher levels if a judgment is deemed unfair at
a particular level. But even unfair judgments do not cause much conflict, because
their system of Rule by Virtue leaves the lessons of any particular judgment vague
and doesn’t create precedent. Whereas under the analytic European systems of jus-
tice, any particular conflict can create a precedent, multiplying the formal rules.
These cultural differences are reflected in some aspects of the greater power or po-
litical centralization in China and decentralization in Europe. Europeans instituted
decentralized contentious democracies, first in Classical Greece and later in modern
(cid:0)(cid:0)
10 There are )b pages of synonyms at https://www.thesaurus.com/browse/big/)b (Retrieved L/)[/MN).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 11
Europe and America. China’s Imperial hierarchy under Confucian ideals has been the
most stable centralized organization of the past [ZZZ years.
Part of the reason we draw this distinction between the cultures and languages in
China and Europe is to highlight how diverse global networks can be. The challenge
of designing governance in networks uniting groups with broadly different sets of
values requires us to consciously address these differences.
Another reason to study these differences is to be aware of the potential for differ-
ent governance mechanisms when organizing a group.
Protocol decentralization in China
Comparing Europe and China over the course of eZZZ years is an important example
for the decentralized to centralized thesis. But we must be conscious that anything
said about large societies over the course of millennia is plainly a contentious gener-
alization.
Inasmuch as a society organizes itself in a rigid centralized hierarchy, it is initially
very efficient and effective at addressing its problems, which leads to a temporary
stability as the society adheres more to the hierarchy. At best, however, the hierar-
chy has always failed after a few centuries, usually much sooner, and the resulting
chaos leaves fertile ground for reorganizing the old order. Successors may reorganize
the conquered society completely along the conquerors’ system. Or, more com-
monly, the succeeding power adjusts the existing hierarchy of a region slightly and
partially repopulates it—especially at the top. This is revolution. We use a word that
evokes cycles, because the hierarchy periodically collapses into chaos then naturally
reemerges.
Chinese society has been much more stable in the course of the last [[ZZ years,
compared with Europe. Like Ancient Egypt before it, China has had many political
revolutions as the heads of state succeeded each other. But the habits and culture of
peasants has been much more stable in both Egypt and China than in countries with
more protocol-centralized legal systems. Egypt and China had legal systems where
society informally supported moral precepts more than explicitly-defined, unchang-
ing legalistic precedent. This is referred to as Rule of Virtue versus Rule of Law. Pro-
fessional and social positions were clearly hierarchical, with some roles being seen as
higher or lower in status, but most roles weren’t organized into tightly-defined
power relationships. For example, judges would personally investigate a crime, get-
ting to know a community and the principals of a case intimately. A judgment would
be enforced by the community, not police. And the judgment would not be bound
legally by any precedent; it held sway depending on the perceived virtue of the judge
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

12 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
and his decision.11 This led to the ideal man stereotype of judges, which Western
audiences might recognize in Kung Fu movies, such as Crouching Tiger, Hidden
Dragon. A judge was always a man of universal learning, typically a doctor and phar-
macist, a martial arts expert and a scholar of ancient poetry.
Even today, China is much more protocol decentralized than the West. China has a
less rigid hierarchical organization with less uniform rules than the West. The Peo-
ple’s Republic of China (PRC) does not have an enforced constitution with a clearly
defined nationwide power structure.12 Even though the Chinese Communist Party
(CCP) inhabits a parallel bureaucracy in most every school, hospital and other institu-
tion in the land, its power structure is not explicitly and formally defined. For an em-
pire and society often seen as monolithic and autocratic, the roles in government are
much more locally heterogeneous than in the West, where the roles of mayor and
councilmember are duplicated much more faithfully throughout a country.
It is often claimed that China is relatively culturally homogenous. While it is true that
there is a very strong impulse toward unity and harmony, the reason this has been
necessary for millennia is because of China’s cultural diversity. Though Han Chinese
have been a culturally, economically, and politically dominant majority for roughly
e,ZZZ years, there are many dialects of their language (Mandarin) and many other
languages to go with the Yl ethnicities the CCP officially recognizes. These ethnicities
display obvious diversity in their speech, clothing, traditions, and genetics. Craig lived
in the Chinese province of Zhejiang, where he experienced the truth of the saying
“the language of your hometown is not understood eZ km away”.
The highest office in China is the president (currently Xi Jinping). This ceremonial
role’s only formal power is to nominate the head of the legislative body, the premier
of the State Council.13 The actual power of the president is making speeches.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
11 In medieval China, society and the economy were largely structured by kinship-based clans. Rules
were different for each clan, but it has been estimated that less than MN% of rules listed any punish-
ment, and these were likely recommendations. See p. )) of Avner Greif & Guido Tabellini, “The Clan
and the Corporation: Sustaining Cooperation in China and Europe”, Journal of Comparative Economics,
Vol.b[ ()), pp. )-g[ (MN)a). This is not to say that there were no rigid precepts or clearly defined rules.
The Tang Code (iMb) was an extremely detailed, logically rigorous legal system that helped guide jus-
tice throughout the imperial period, culminating in the Qing Code of )ibb.
12 “The Constitution of the People's Republic of China is nominally the supreme law of the People's
Republic of China. … Though technically the "supreme legal authority" and "fundamental law of the
state", the ruling Communist Party of China has a documented history of violating many of the consti-
tution's provisions and censoring calls for greater adherence to it. Furthermore, claims of violations of
constitutional rights cannot be used in Chinese courts, and the National People's Congress Constitu-
tion and Law Committee, the legislative committee responsible for constitutional review, has never
ruled a law or regulation unconstitutional.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constitution_of_the_Peo-
ple%Mas_Republic_of_China Retrieved [/MM/MNMN.
13 “In modern Chinese politics, the paramount leader (最高领导人, Zuìgāo Lǐngdǎorén) is an informal
term for the most prominent political leader … [it] is not, however, a formal position nor an office unto
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 13
Periodically, the president will make a speech about, for example, the new Five-Year
Plan. This speech will be almost entirely abstract, speaking in generalities and slo-
gans about which direction the nation should move toward. For example, the pri-
mary policy of the [Z)l—[Z[Z Five-Year Plan was "Everyone is an entrepreneur, cre-
ativity of the masses", 大众创业，万众创新. Then the political bureaucracy
interprets the speech at the local level and attempts to implement reforms or initia-
tives reflecting the slogans. Each locality scrambles to keep their initiatives in line
with what other territories are doing, out of respect for nationwide harmony. But
there are no formal rules dictating specifically how a province should implement
these reforms.
This loose power structure is arguably the consequence of the revolution(s) that
rocked the nation during the [Zth century response to the Century of Humiliation14.
It has been suggested that the lack of rigid hierarchy is a consequence of the rela-
tively recent chaos of revolution. But many societies have responded to chaos with
rapid adoption of stronger hierarchical organization, such as [Zth century fascist
governments in the West. A better explanation is that Chinese society has a very
long tradition of social decentralization. This is reflected on the individual level,
where mainland Chinese citizens are quite autonomous and responsible for most of
their personal development and daily choices.15 However, compared with individu-
als in the West, the Chinese strive more to fit in with expected normal social behav-
ior.
Chinese history traces continuous legal thought from at least )ZZZ BC, with two ma-
jor perspectives which have influenced China to the present. Confucius’ Rule of Vir-
tue philosophy is more protocol decentralized. Shang Yang’s Rule of Law philosophy
is more normative and protocol centralized.16
Both Confucius and Shang Yang lived and taught during a time of chaos before the
Qin and Han dynasties unified China politically (Confucius YY)–^‘m BC, Shang Yang d.
ee_ BC). The political chaos of the Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States
(cid:0)(cid:0)
itself. The term gained prominence during the era of Deng Xiaoping ()\aL–)\L\), when he was able to
wield political power without necessarily holding any official or formally significant party or govern-
ment positions at any given time.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paramount_leader Retrieved
[/MM/MNMN.
14 “The century of humiliation (百年耻辱) is the term used in China to describe the period of interven-
tion and perceived subjugation of the Chinese Empire by Western powers, Russia and Japan between
)Lg\ and )\b\.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Century_of_humiliation Retrieved [/MM/MNMN.
15 On the other hand, lifelong choices that non-Chinese often judge to be personal rights are not af-
forded to citizens, as evidenced by the One Child Policy.
16 Zhang Xiangming, "On two ancient Chinese administrative ideas: Rule of Virtue and Rule by Law,"
Culture Mandala: The Bulletin of the Centre for E ast-West Cultural and Economic Studies: Vol. [: Iss.
), Article a, (MNNM).
Available at: http://epublications.bond.edu.au/cm/vol[/iss)/a Retrieved [/MM/MNMN.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

14 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
period that they lived through led both thinkers to advocate a strong politically-cen-
tralized hierarchy, but they diverged in their prescriptions for less and more protocol
centralization, legally. Confucius (and especially his follower Mencius) argued people
were basically good, and so administrators should rule from the spirit of the law and
should lead by example, displaying the highest virtues in order to bring long-term
harmony. Shang Yang (and especially his follower Han Fei) argued the Legalist school
of thought (or Fajia), which is founded from the position that people are basically
evil, so the letter of the law should be paramount to constrain their base instincts.17
The Qin state would eventually unify China for the first time in [[) BC. The Qin
state’s decline, reorganization, subsequent triumph, precipitous fall, and rebirth is an
excellent example of the strengths and weaknesses of organizing society along dif-
ferent points in the (de)centralization spectrum. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy archive’s entry on the history of Legalism in China18 reads as an apology for
our central thesis: Centralization is a powerful mechanism for rapidly building an effi-
cient organization for solving a specific problem (e.g., war in pre-unified China). The
more effective and efficient the architecture is at solving the problem, the more rigid
the hierarchy becomes, and the more unforgiving it is for anyone on the outside. But
rigid architectures are unstable and fail when met with novel challenges. More de-
centralized organizations are more stable.
As a thumbnail sketch of the whole of Chinese history:
After centuries of warring kingdoms in the region of what later came to be known as
China, the previously chaotically unorganized people had come to be partially unified
by the cultural and economic communication war unintentionally provides. They
were also united in their weariness from war. This meant China was fertile ground
for the centralizing effects of Qin Shi Huang’s initiatives standardizing language and
writing, currency, weights and measures, engineering standards for transport (roads,
carts, canals) and construction, history and education (burning most books and bury-
ing scholars), etc.
Around eYZ BC the weak Qin state, furthest inland from the ocean, reorganized
along centralized principles. King Qin Shi Huang, following the Legalism school of
thought, built the most powerful military China had ever seen.19 Qin Shi Huang con-
quered all the other kingdoms by [[) BC, becoming the most powerful emperor in
the world. Under Legalism, the Qin Empire hierarchy was extremely rigid, and equal-
ity before the law had a particularly hierarchical connotation: “The ruler creates the
(cid:0)(cid:0)
17 As opposed to the more philosophical Analects of Confucius, the Han Feizi Legalist text reads similar
to Machiavelli’s The Prince, as practical advice to a ruler for how to administrate effectively. Also com-
pare the pessimistic vision of humanity with Hobbes’ philosophy.
18 https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/winMN)b/entries/chinese-legalism/#EpiLegChiHis (Retrieved
[/g)/MNMN).
19 Preserved for posterity in Xian province. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mauso-
leum_of_the_First_Qin_Emperor (Retrieved L/L/MN).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 15
law; the ministers abide by the law; and subjects are punished by the law. All […] are
subject to law.”20
After the Qin Emperor died, the brittle hierarchy immediately collapsed, )Y years af-
ter unification. Once unity was reestablished under the succeeding Han dynasty,
their rulers quite consciously abandoned the centralizing legal policies. Valuing sta-
bility over efficiency, they adhered to the Law-of-Virtue Confucian school of thought
with greater protocol decentralization.
This philosophy of protocol decentralization with clan-hierarchy-determined Chinese
politics, made China the most stable empire since Ancient Egypt, with brief interrup-
tions of protocol centralization whenever they needed to restore the state’s waning
economic and military power, under Zhuge Liang ()_)–[e^), Su Chuo (^m_–Y^l), the
Tang Code (l[^), Wang Anshi ()Z[)–)Z_l) and Zhang Juzheng ()Y[Y–)Y_[), and the
Qing Code ()l^^).
Finally, again under Mao Zedong in )m^m, the Chinese government explicitly followed
Shang Yang’s philosophy of protocol centralization. In that year, after the Century of
Humiliation, the Communist Revolution removed the Kuomintang government and
quickly centralized their institutions following the example of the Qin success and
strengthened their military to expel all foreign invaders and reunite the nation. This
centralized hierarchy was extremely successful at the military goal it was designed
for, but completely failed at solving other important problems once the military
threat was gone. Like the Qin emperor he emulated, the supreme leader of the com-
munist military hierarchy, Mao Zedong, ruled from the revolution until his death in
)m‘l. During this time the hierarchy instituted reforms which resulted in catastrophic
failures, such as the Cultural Revolution and the Great Leap Forward, under which
more than eZ million people perished. In )m‘_ Deng Xiao Ping assumed power and
reformed the economy, under the Boluan Fanzheng period, literally meaning "elimi-
nating chaos and returning to normal". That is, China attempted to return to the pre-
vious, stabilizing philosophy of protocol decentralization of the Chinese Imperial Pe-
riod, with greater market freedoms and a Rule of Virtue justice system.
Since )m‘_ societies and culture have hardly been stable most anywhere on the
globe. Creating a stable government in the rapidly changing economy of China during
this period seems nearly impossible. Therefore, it is natural that China would swing
precipitously between centralized and decentralized initiatives. The most visible initi-
atives are naturally centralized. The most troubling recent examples are the Great
Firewall of China and the Social Credit System, as obstacles to transparency and indi-
vidual autonomy. We will return to this in Chapter e, when we discuss the conse-
quences of applying new IT tools to creating centralized reputational systems, in the
section on Orwellian nightmares.
What lesson do we take from Imperial Chinese history for our present goal of imple-
menting new advances in information technology? Where should we decide to draw
(cid:0)(cid:0)
20 Jianfu Chen, Chinese Law: Context and Transformation, Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, (MNNL).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

16 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
the lines of power? Should our governance processes recognize that we are all basi-
cally evil in our hearts and that the beasts within us need to be controlled? If Shang
Yang and Hobbes are right, we should give control to an impersonal hierarchy, within
which we only have limited and local control. Or should we instead speak to our
good side? Should we follow Confucius, believing we are all basically good at heart?
Then we should tap into our better natures and encourage productive cooperation,
by empowering each individual with greater freedom. Anyone who has spent an
hour on a playground knows the answer is obviously both. Our governance system
must prevent rapacious greed with concrete punishments. But it should also encour-
age and enable harmonious cooperation and individual autonomy. The lesson of Im-
perial China, and Pharaonic Egypt before it, is that decentralization of power, individ-
ual autonomy, gives long-term stability when there are unifying ideals that the
society can believe in.
Political centralization in China and Europe
In this section we argue that China enjoyed greater uniformity in their values than
Europe did, which allowed them to institute clan social organization with less le-
gal/protocol centralization. Europe’s greater value diversity required they institute
corporate organization with a more rigid hierarchical structure with more legal cen-
tralization. For stability, Europe needed to relieve the pressure elsewhere.
There were great expressions of political centralization around the year ))ZZ A.D.
with medieval aristocracy. At this time the High Middle Ages in Europe were orga-
nized around the philosophy of the “Great Chain of Being” with God at the top,
served by the king, then the lords and clergy, followed by knights, then their peas-
ants and livestock at the bottom.
Contemporaneously, Imperial China during the Song dynasty was organized around
hierarchical Confucianism. From an abstract point of view, the aristocratic organiza-
tion of Imperial China under the “Mandate of Heaven” was remarkably similar to
medieval Europe under the “Great Chain of Being”. But the civil bureaucracy of the
Song dynasty controlled many times as many subjects. In the year ))ZZ the popula-
tion of the Holy Roman Empire was roughly )Z million, while Imperial China gov-
erned mZ million.
The organizational successes of both empires can be directly attributed to advances
in information technology. But the fact that the Song dynasty eclipsed Europe’s High
Middle Ages is often directly attributed to China’s unique adoption of transparency
and meritocracy. The Chinese civil service examinations, which were open to all, re-
gardless of social standing, led to a literate meritocratic bureaucracy as opposed to
Europe’s easily corruptible system of power inheritance. China’s bureaucracy stored,
processed, and transmitted unprecedented governmental information leading to a
flourishing economy which grew exponentially for centuries. The meritocratic system
stabilized the society as its people enjoyed strong social mobility and individual au-
tonomy.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 17
The meritocracy also empowered generations of talented scholars and inventors
who put China centuries ahead of any other country technologically. Other Song ad-
vances in information technology include woodblock and ceramic movable type
printing (invented by Bi Sheng 毕升, mmZ–)ZY)). Printing allowed the dissemination
of rules across great distances and populations. Thanks to these innovations, the
world’s first banknote was seen in the Song dynasty, and paper money was first em-
ployed extensively. These advances led to much greater centralization, as the Song
Imperial government dominated the right to print specie. We may assume it is natu-
ral to establish monopoly power on the right to print money. However, compare this
with the history of printed banknotes which were individually issued by each bank in
many times and places, especially whenever there was less centralization of power,
including )mth century America.
In both Europe and Asia at this time, the centralized hierarchy expressed itself in the
merchant class in the larger cities. Merchants organized into the most sophisticated
guild system the world had ever seen, with clear ranking of more and less important
professions, from scholars and doctors down to actors and prostitutes.21
As mentioned in the previous section, China was relatively decentralized in protocol
through most of its history, with a Rule of Virtue legal system. This is reflected in its
dominant clan structure. The major social and economic institutions of China re-
volved around kinship-oriented clans. You are a member of a Chinese clan if you
claim to share family lineage with some common original male ancestor progenitor
of the clan. Chinese clans had a less rigid system of legal enforcement, sanctions and
rewards, than their European contemporaries. Clan members were compelled to co-
operate and behave well, due to moral and familial obligation, more than mere ad-
herence to clearly stipulated laws.
In Europe there was much more protocol centralization than in China. Clans were
not as dominant in personal economic life. Instead the greater focus on individuality
gave a need for impersonal legal regulation and equality before the law. This led to a
Rule of Law system with citywide charters and constitutions with formal rules and
punishments. Instead of clans, Europe’s major civic institutions were corporations,
with many different purposes. These corporations could be anything from religious
groups to entire independent cities. “[B]etween ))^e and )^‘Y, in Germany alone, for
example, )mZ cities adopted one of the twenty different law codes”.22
China was more protocol decentralized than Europe for much of its history, but it
was more politically centralized, as Imperial China ruled over a much greater popula-
tion than Europe. And Europe’s protocol centralization was fragmented between
many different kingdoms and city states, which seems natural considering the
(cid:0)(cid:0)
21 Ebrey, Walthall, Palais, (2006). East Asia: A Cultural, Social, and Political
History. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, p. 157.
22 Greif (MN)a), p. )M.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

18 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
greater emphasis on individuality expressing itself in Europe than in China. And so,
Europe is seen as more politically decentralized compared with China during the
High Medieval period, though this can also be explained by their inferior information
technology, meaning they were incapable of organizing anywhere near to the quan-
tity of citizens China commanded in the same period.
Despite the differences in protocol and political centralization, the general cultural
centralization that the new information technology of the time afforded led to much
more sophisticated engineering projects, such as cathedrals and pagodas. Central-
ized economic development, especially in China, multiplied the population the re-
gions could sustain.
But centralization doesn’t last. As leaders pass on their powers and duties, corrup-
tion sets in. As law moves from the sacred, to rituals, to institutions, people are more
free to test the legal limits. No dynasty lasts more than a few centuries before it is
overturned from corruption born within or by foreign invasion from without. With-
out a transcendental spiritual/philosophical principle to unify a society, the rules
erode as exceptions to the routine are found which improve function temporarily,
yet violate the founding principles of the culture. Such violations split the population.
The very economic success that centralization affords leads societies to encounter
foreign cultures, goods, and technologies. These alien experiences challenge the in-
stitutions that allowed the foreign adventure. Institutions that have been hollowed
out by time and have not been revitalized by contact with the ideals from their ori-
gins are incapable of responding to exotic challenges.
Stagnant centralized institutions become irrelevant and incapable of useful response
during chaotic periods, while decentralized structures thrive, such as loose labor af-
filiations, or black markets, or clans. Decentralized organizations naturally respond to
“information at the edge”. They are energized when leaders are attacked. Decentral-
ized rebellions are strengthened by the loss of their leaders, who become martyrs.
Decentralized organizations form around transcendental ideas, not on codified laws,
and so respond well in times of chaos and remain stable in the long term.
In general, the lesson of clans versus corporations is that when a group has more
unity in their values, then they can have less rigidity in their legal protocols. So
greater value centralization allows greater protocol decentralization which leads to
greater long-term stability. But when there is more diversity in a group’s values a
corporation structure emerges with more rigid legal stipulations—letter of the law
becomes more important. This is because the group needs to fairly apply the law in
more diverse situations to keep group cohesion. In this case a corporation is less sta-
ble in the long term. Stability needs to be sought elsewhere with other structures.
The next section explores a decentralized political organization which survived more
than eZZ years against adversaries with incalculably more resources. This illustrates
that a decentralized organization cannot be conquered by attacking it from the out-
side. When you do, the group merely decentralizes further. Members become more
autonomous and more devoted to the principles upon which the organization was
founded. Decentralized organizations can only be destabilized by changing the entire
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 19
game, by recasting the environment under which they pursue their goals in order to
sap the power of their values.
The Apaches vs. Bitcoin
The Starfish and the Spider,23 by Ori Brafman and Rod Beckstrom is the most in-
sightful book we’ve read on decentralized organization. Its central thesis is illustrated
by the story of the Apache Native American Indian tribe.24 Their conclusion suggests
that Bitcoin won’t work.
This story was related by Thomas Nevins, who studied and lived with the Apaches. In
the late )lZZs the Apaches settled into their current territory in the mountains near
the border of Arizona and New Mexico. The Spanish had been continuously expand-
ing their territory in the Americas since Christopher Columbus first explored the area
in the early )YZZs. The Spanish were attempting to settle the area in New Mexico,
but their northward expansion failed for the first time when encountering the
Apaches. (Their second northward incursion failed when they encountered the Co-
manches, who were also politically decentralized.)
For more than [ZZ years the small band of Apaches resisted succeeding empires, to
remain self-sovereign. These people commanded a tiny fraction of the material
wealth of their adversaries, but the Apaches were successful because of their politi-
cal decentralization.
In the course of a few decades, the Spanish Empire, beginning with Columbus in the
Caribbean, conquered tribes and empires throughout the entire Western hemi-
sphere of the planet. Cortés conquered the Aztec empire in present-day Mexico and
Central America in )Y)m-)Y[). Later the Pizarros conquered the Incan empire which
spanned extensive and diverse terrain in South America. Compared with the small
Apache tribe, living in a relatively small area in the mountains of present-day Arizona
and New Mexico, the Aztec and Incan empires had vast wealth and a complex effec-
tive hierarchy. Yet the Apaches succeeded for centuries where other groups, large
and small, were rapidly defeated.
The crucial difference between the Apaches and other networks the Spanish Empire
conquered was that the Apache’s political organization was not centered around a
chief. The Spanish conquistadors Cortés and Pizarro captured and killed the Aztec
(cid:0)(cid:0)
23 Starfish are decentralized organisms. Their nervous systems don’t have a centralized hierarchical
structure. This makes them slow, but practically immortal—if you chop one in half, you get two star-
fish. They’re stable and can handle adversity. Spiders have a centralized nervous system, with a brain,
so they can make decisions quickly. But you can kill them with a blow to the head.
24 Though this is not the name these tribes ever use to refer to themselves. The word Apache is prob-
ably derived from the Zuni word for “enemy”. The Apaches themselves had different demonyms in
their own dialects, including n nee, n dee, dene, and dine.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

20 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
and Incan emperors, Moctezuma and Atahualpa. By controlling the leaders, the
Spanish efficiently took control of the centralized hierarchies of the empires.
Beginning in the )l_Zs the Spanish built a series of presidios (fortified residential
compounds) in the area and instituted plans for assimilating the natives of the region
under their hierarchical feudal order. The Spanish plan, that was successful in many
other regions, was to convert the locals religiously to Catholicism and economically
to small-scale farming, and bring them all under the political control of the Spanish
crown. These initiatives were relatively successful with other tribes, even nomadic
tribes of similar size and distribution, but failed with the Apaches, most of whom re-
sisted the loss of their sovereignty. When the Spanish attempted to coerce the
Apaches, the violence backfired. The Apaches almost casually defeated the Spanish
with routine raids on their centralized holdings. After two decades of failure, the
Spanish Empire had abandoned most of its presidios in Apache territory.
“Part of the reason the Spanish had such difficulty in establishing control and domin-
ion over Apaches had to do with the dispersed, decentralized nature of Apache social
organization.”25 The Apaches had no static, official rulers, which made it impossible
for the Spanish to replay their strategy of killing or controlling the leader of each new
territory they invaded. The Apaches had no rigid power hierarchy to manipulate. The
Apache had spiritual leaders, called nant’án. But the nant’án led by example, not co-
ercion. The members of the tribe continuously made choices whether to follow a
suggestion from a nant’án based on his personal strength and reputation. When the
Spanish would kill (or capture and coerce) a leader, the tribe would not be mollified
or lose its organization. In fact, killing a nant’án would strengthen the cohesion of
the group as they had a new example to learn from, whether the nant’án lived and
died according to Apache ideals.
Any loss would only further decentralize the Apache people. Whenever a village was
raided, that encouraged the Apache to become more nomadic. The subgroups be-
came smaller, so they were more difficult to locate and attack. They decentralized
geographically across terrain large armies found difficult to negotiate.
After the Mexican Revolution in )_[) the Mexicans adopted a similar strategy to the
Spanish, and so they similarly failed against the Apache. As a definitive sign of their
desperation, the Mexicans put bounties on the scalps of Apache men, women, and
children.
We may witness this pattern at various locations in different times throughout his-
tory. A materially superior centralized society will discover the limits of its power in
conflict with politically and geographically decentralized groups. The Roman Empire’s
borders were in “barbarian” lands. Afghanistan is the Graveyard of Empires. The U.S.
is only the most recent empire to find their global dominance ends when it meets
decentralized territory. Before that, the Soviet invasions of Afghanistan in )m[m and
)m‘m-_m failed. The British failed in )_em-)_^[. Since the Arabs met their first major
(cid:0)(cid:0)
25 Thomas J. Nevins, Introduction to The Apache Indians: In Search of the Missing Tribe, by Helge
Ingstad, University of Nebraska Press, MNNb, p. xxiv.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 21
setback when they failed to conquer Afghanistan in the _th century, no centralized
authority, foreign or domestic, has been able to bring the decentralized network of
Afghani tribes into uniform control.
When a superior army fails to dominate a weaker enemy, the causes invariably in-
clude the unfamiliar terrain and geographical decentralization of the enemy. But that
is not the primary characteristic that determines the outcome. The U.S. policy of re-
settlement on reservation land can be analyzed for each of the tribes to determine
how organizational style effects military success. History never simplifies down to
singular causes, such as political centralization, but some trends are more evident
than others. The more sedentary tribes, who relied on agriculture and were geo-
graphically more centralized around fertile locations, were more quickly conquered
than the nomadic plains tribes who were widely dispersed. The nomadic plains
tribes, however, were all geographically dispersed. What distinguished the tribes
who were more successful against the U.S. military? Political decentralization. Those
with strong chieftains were more quickly settled on reservations. The last groups to
submit to U.S. sovereignty were the most politically decentralized, the Comanche
and the Apache.
With all these historical examples, what insights do we have for what stops a decen-
tralized organization? Surprisingly, it was not until the [Zth century that the United
States finally succeeded in permanently converting the Apaches’ way of life from no-
madic to sedentary and asserting sovereignty. How did it happen?
After the Mexican American War, the United States annexed the Apache territory in
)_^_. The centralized U. S. military predictably copied the Spanish and Mexican strat-
egies for negotiating with the Apaches. They built garrisons and instituted a policy of
gradual but coercive acculturation and resettlement. And predictably, despite their
overwhelming material superiority, the U.S. army failed to conquer or pacify the
Apache people.
Starting in )_‘e the U.S. government instituted its reservation policy where the
Apaches were coerced toward settling on reservation land where they were more
safe from reprisal, and they were promised rations. By )_‘_ most Western Apaches
were conditionally settled, but this didn’t last. Poor conditions led to revolts
throughout the )__Zs.
The resettlement effort was only successful with the Apaches once the U.S. military
struck upon an unprecedented strategy. In )m)l the U.S. government gave the
Apaches cows.
As Nevins explained, the introduction of the cattle created “a zero-sum battle over
resources between lineages”.26 The valuable assets created the internal competition
necessary to generate a hierarchy of power over disbursement of resources and
property. Whereas formerly, the nant’án would only lead by example, now the
nant’án could lead by punishing or rewarding tribal members materially. Members of
the network jockeyed for power. A politically centralized hierarchy emerged in tribal
(cid:0)(cid:0)
26 The Starfish and the Spider, p )bL.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

22 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
councils. Bureaucratic rules were instituted in geographically centralized reserva-
tions. And the U.S. government finally had a structure they could manipulate and
control.
The profit motive came to dominate the Apache incentive structure, undermining
the ideology that kept the group decentralized.
Brafman and Beckstrom argue the Apache history demonstrates that decentralized
organizations are unstoppable, they cannot be conquered. Three successive empires
repeatedly failed in their missions to destroy Apache society. A decentralized organi-
zation cannot be controlled by a centralized authority. But you might hope to con-
vert them to a centralized organization by finding the proper incentives; then you
can manipulate the centralized power structure. As is being demonstrated again to-
day in fighting terrorist organizations around the world, attacking a decentralized or-
ganization only makes them more decentralized and more powerful as enemies.
“The values are the organization”. A decentralized organization’s power is their ide-
ology; it keeps them together; it drives them; it inspires new recruits—unlike central-
ized organizations whose rigid hierarchies are maintained by universal motivations
such as fear of ostracization or competition for profits.
The thesis of The Starfish and the Spider is that the best way to convert a decentral-
ized organization to a centralized organization is to introduce the profit motive. They
go on to suggest that the greatest danger Wikipedia faces is the potential to earn
money, which would trigger the inevitable centralizing effect of internal competition.
They discuss other examples, such as how book sales corrupted and undermined the
power of the Alcoholics Anonymous decentralized network, sapping its energy, so
that now there are numerous decentralized offshoots. Brafman and Beckstrom pro-
claim that decentralized organizations cannot avoid centralizing when concern for
profits overrides the group’s moral ideals.
The Starfish and the Spider was written in [ZZl, predating the first published Bitcoin
block by three years. They couldn’t be aware of the new advances in information
technology that allowed new types of decentralized information control. We will ex-
plore these tools in Chapter [. But despite ten years of success in Bitcoin’s politically
decentralized operation, there are hints that Brafman and Beckstrom are not entirely
wrong. The thesis that money destroys decentralized projects by giving a focal point
for internal competition is still prescient even in the face of Bitcoin. Slowly, Bitcoin
hashing power has become more concentrated in mining pools, until today the ma-
jority of power resides in the single country of China. The CCP’s strong economic
controls could mean that Bitcoin’s claim to decentralization is theoretically and per-
haps even technically compromised.
In fact, almost every blockchain project we’re aware of is suffering under the central-
izing force of competition for equity control and profit. It’s rarely possible for people
to work idealistically toward the goals of the group and blithely watch the rewards
be split unfairly with rent seekers at the top. Humans’ sense of fairness is powerful
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 23
and deep seated.27 Good ideas will fail to be implemented unless the reward struc-
ture is balanced. Unconscious of these forces, these Webe projects predictably move
towards centralization.
Every contemporary Webe decentralized organization we are aware of has critical
flaws in its governance structure. The best run contemporary for-profit decentralized
organizations, blockchains, rely on extremely primitive communication, such as in-
formal email lists (cf., BIPs and EIPs). The networks which are still progressing, such
as Ethereum, rely on benevolent dictators with a cult of personality or centralized
foundations with salaried members seeking profit. There are few sophisticated gov-
ernance procedures which can predictably survive the deaths of the current leaders.
There are very rarely any ratified statements of principles, much less an enforceable
constitution that governs any such attempt at forming a genuine DAO.
How can a decentralized organization come to consensus on governance? How can a
modern Webe project agree on technology upgrades without centralizing their deci-
sion-making process? There is another architectural design, besides the new crypto-
graphic and information technology tools, that can keep a group politically decen-
tralized even when profits are on the line, in valuable blockchain networks like
Bitcoin. There is a much older incentive structure which has historically proved capa-
ble of maintaining a large decentralized network of economically self-interested au-
tonomous group members. Brafman and Beckstrom (and perhaps also Satoshi Naka-
moto and Vitalik Buterin) apparently had not considered the Maghribis.
The Maghribis were a decentralized trade organization entirely devoted to profit.
These Jewish merchants from the early ))th century had none of the information
technology that enables Bitcoin. Yet they remained decentralized because their or-
ganization prized something more valuable than money.
Maghribi traders’ solution
The Maghribis were a decentralized group of Jewish traders in Northwestern Africa
(in modern-day Tunisia and especially Egypt) around )ZZZ AD. The Maghribis traded
across great distances along the Silk Road on trips that would regularly last months
at a time. They managed to solve the business contract challenges of the Principal-
(cid:0)(cid:0)
27 A sense of fairness is also strong among primates and other animals, as is demonstrated by the
famous cucumber experiment. Two monkeys in side-by-side cages are rewarded for performing the
trivial task of returning a rock to the experimenter. One monkey receives a slice of cucumber. When it
watches the other monkey receive a grape, it protests the unfairness vehemently. “Thus far, passive
and active protest against unfavorable outcomes has been documented in monkeys, apes, dogs, and
birds. It is thought that these species compare their outcomes with those of others so as to judge the
merit of their partnerships.” –Sarah F. Brosnan and Frans B. M. de Waal, “Evolution of responses to
(un)fairness”, Science, Vol gbi, Issue iMNa, )a October (MN)b)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

24 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
Agent Problem28, asymmetric information due to time and distance separation, and
limited legal contract enforceability, without any of the digital technological ad-
vantages we enjoy today.
The situation was that a merchant would send an agent out with goods and cash to
trade along the dangerous Silk Road. After being gone for months and far from any
control or oversight from their associates, there is a natural incentive for the agent
to simply keep the profits and leave, or to return and falsely report they were stolen.
Less dramatically, it would be easy for an agent to skim without detection. The mar-
kets of the Silk Road had great volatility in their prices between distant locations and
times. The little communication was highly unreliable. Even if the principal had inde-
pendent communication with the distant merchant their agent was engaging, a frac-
tion of the profits could be stolen and shared between the agent and the foreign
merchant. Unforeseen costs could be invented.
In point of fact, the records show that such embezzlement was rare. Instead, a
strong sense of trust pervaded. So what mechanism protected the principals from
their agents’ asymmetric information? The answer was not a strong centralized gov-
ernment.
The Maghribis lived under the rule of the Muslim Fatimid caliphate, who controlled
Northern Africa, Sicily and the broad fertile Eurasian plains, known as the Levant. The
Fatimids had notably liberal trade policies to encourage business. Migration and the
flow of goods had very low customs friction due to competitive ports. Tariffs were
rare and temporary. The official legal channels for the Maghribis were slow and not
to be relied upon in case a dispute arose. The Maghribis couldn’t create their own
politically-enforced legal system. They were not capable of forming a strong central-
ized legal or political hierarchy, partly because any centralization of Jewish power
would be seen as a threat to the primacy of the caliphate.
A system of ethics founded in their common religion helps explain the motivation for
why merchants did not steal. And the social connection of a family-and-friend net-
work of cooperation is also undeniably important in preventing theft. However, the
trading distances and durations involved and the value of the temptations were ex-
treme. In fact, the Maghribi network included people who lived in different countries
and were part of independent Jewish communities with no family ties. The Maghribis
lived throughout the Mediterranean, but they never worked with any other Jewish
traders, even if the others lived and worked nearby, unless they were also part of the
Maghribi professional network. Ethics and social sanctions are not enough to explain
(cid:0)(cid:0)
28 In the Principal-Agent problem coordination revolves around those who delegate authority (princi-
pals) and those who are acting on behalf of others (agents). Because of natural human shortcomings,
bounded rationality, incomplete foresight, and information asymmetries between principal and agent,
it is impossible for principals to contract for every possible action or inaction of the agent in order to
induce the agent to act in the best interest of the principal. For an overview of the relevant literature
see, Shieffer, Andre & Vishny, Robert W, “A Survey of Corporate Governance”, Journal of Finance,
[M(M), pp aga-aLg ()\\a).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 25
the long and powerful cooperation that sustained the Maghribis across vast dis-
tances.
The business challenges were further multiplied by the various complex tasks en-
trusted to the agents. The agents had to be excellent navigators, shippers, bargain-
ers, bureaucrats, and soldiers. They had to choose the most efficient routes. They
needed to hire transport caravans and boats, longshoremen to load and unload
boats, and storage. The agents used their personal network of information on buyers
and sellers to find the best prices, goods, and terms. These changed unpredictably,
and the principals certainly didn’t give precise instructions on what price to pay for
what goods months before the agents arrived at their destinations. The bureaucracy
of customs and tariffs and local taxes needed to be negotiated, and the agents chose
their routes depending on which ports were cheaper or safer or had less traffic
based on experience and rumors. Finally, they were required to deal with the haz-
ards of travel, including weather, warlords, and bandits. If all of these tasks were
achieved, the agents would be entrusted with increasingly more complex jobs, in-
cluding relaying market information and overseeing businesses in various locales.
How can you incentivize honesty and fair dealing under these circumstances? The
agents were even officially in charge of bribing various officials along the route. Why
didn’t they skim for themselves?
This question is particularly relevant to today’s concern with decentralizing business
)ZZZ years later in the [)st century. We’re building economic networks which hope
to incorporate anonymous members from different cultures across the globe, with-
out being able to rely on any local legal enforcement, without constructing any cen-
tralized control structure. How did the Maghribis solve this puzzle? How did they
solve their information asymmetry problems? How did they motivate long-term,
good-faith cooperation?
The Maghribis’ solution was reputation.
The story we tell in this section was first detailed in Avner Greif’s deep exploration of
the Cairo geniza.29 A geniza is a hidden room in a synagogue intended to temporar-
ily hold sacred texts. It is forbidden in Orthodox Judaism to dispose carelessly of any
writing holding the name of God. The genizot held worn out copies of bibles and reli-
gious commentary temporarily, before they were properly buried in a cemetery.
Since business communication amongst the Maghribi regularly opened with religious
invocations, they were often stored in a geniza. (The extensive Cairo geniza also held
proof that the Maghribis used double-entry bookkeeping, predating its famous use in
medieval Florence by centuries.)
Reputation gives the proper incentive to create stable, long-term business relation-
ships where both parties act in good faith. The promise of many future contracts in-
centivizes an agent to honor the deal to the best of their ability. Loss of reputation
(cid:0)(cid:0)
29 Avner Greif, Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade: Evidence on the Maghribi Traders, The
Journal of Economic History, Vol. b\, No. b, pp. L[a-LLM ()\L\).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

26 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
would ruin a career. The entire network devoted considerable attention and energy
to policing their reputation.
The Cairo geniza records show that when one particular agent, Abun ben Zedaka in
Jerusalem, was merely accused of embezzlement, principals from as far away as Sic-
ily immediately canceled their contracts with the agent. When a principal was slow
to remunerate an agent because of natural fluctuations in liquidity, they would fret
about the damage it would do to their reputation. In fact, records show that the rep-
utational system was so strong that agents who were the victims of theft along the
journey would regularly rise above any contractual obligations, making their princi-
pals whole from their own funds in order to protect and further their reputation.
Moreover, personal letters show the system was relied upon to the point that most
deals were engaged without any formal contract. This makes sense because no in-
structions could detail the list of minutiae the agents were expected to perform.
Further, principals in the network would entrust their money and assets to members
who had no ability to repay in case of loss. There was a type of reputation-verifica-
tion system for unseasoned traders, called the commenda. The commenda relation-
ship had reputable, older, wealthier members certifying younger agents as trustwor-
thy and skilled—agents who were willing and able to bear the difficulties of the
journey but didn’t yet own the personal resources necessary to refund their princi-
pals in case of loss.
Reputation is extremely valuable for encouraging more efficient business deals. Rep-
utation gives the purchaser the confidence to invest the money and/or assets in the
venture, without spending the extra effort of investigating the agent before, during,
and after the journey. Honesty would be a bad strategy for the agent if the contract
was anonymous and the resolution didn’t affect future contracts. In this imagined
scenario, from a game theory perspective, the game would be a single-stage zero-
sum game. (Game theory applied to the design of decentralized organizations will be
discussed in more detail in Chapter ^.) In this case the best strategy would be for the
agent to steal all the wealth entrusted to him.
By adding reputation to the game, it becomes a repeated game, and the rest of the
community becomes relevant. Reputation is a future-oriented commodity, which
pays off profits with the promise of future contracts. Now the game is a repeated
game which is positive-sum. The best strategy changes to incentivize honesty as the
promise of voluminous future business overrides the potential for a one-time payout
of stealing the principal’s wealth.
The positive-sum nature of the game arises, because reputation itself becomes a val-
uable commodity that can be created during a business deal. Reputation can be
more valuable than present profits. One agent, whose writings are preserved in the
Cairo geniza, sent a letter insulting his principal, “Had I listened to what people say, I
never would have entered into a partnership with you….”30 Then the agent goes on
to explain, nevertheless, he is giving his principal more profits than was contractually
(cid:0)(cid:0)
30 Greif, Reputation and Coalitions, p. La)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 27
obligated. The agent had sold two loads of pepper, one for the principal when it was
safe, as was instructed, and the other for himself. He gambled the price would surge
if ships demanding pepper arrived before he needed to leave. The gamble paid off
and the second load was sold at a much higher price. “But brother, I would not like
to take the profit for myself. Therefore, I transferred the entire sale to our partner-
ship.” The agent forwent his personal profit, despite the fact he had no intention of
ever doing business with that particular principal again, for the sake of protecting
and building his reputation in the larger network.
Meaningful, well-policed reputation makes business dealings more efficient for two
more reasons: freedom of choice of business partners within the network and con-
tracts of short duration are preferred.
First, reputation allows business dealings with any member of the network, regard-
less of personal acquaintance. This requires the network to be closed, however, with
a size limited by the ability to police reputation using the information technology
available.
In ))th century North Africa, information technology consisted of slow transmission
of handwritten letters. However, we can associate one historical IT advance with the
advent of the Maghribi’s reputational system. The Fatimid Empire’s encouragement
of trade provided cheaper and more secure information transmission. There were
regular shipping and caravan links between various trade centers protected by the
Fatimids. The Maghribi sent letters to their business associates through other traders
and through private business professional letter carriers. “The traders sent several
copies of the same letter to insure that at least one would reach its destination.”31
This improvement in bandwidth (if not latency) improved broadcast security in the
network, allowing a trustworthy reputational system to evolve.
With the information technology available today, we have networks on the scale of
Bitcoin—open to anyone on the planet willing to join and follow the rules. The ac-
counting necessary for policing reputation can be achieved for minute behaviors
thanks to contemporary information processing. For the Maghribis, their network
was limited to Jews experienced in Muslim culture, and did not accept Italian Jews,
for instance, since accepting members from other cultures using other languages
would have multiplied the difficulty of policing their reputational system. Today,
such barriers are overcome by the universal logical structure of computer programs.
Second, reputation allows contracts of any duration. Actually, shorter contracts are
preferable, since punishment against a cheating member’s reputation can occur
more quickly. Also, shorter contracts allow more rapid accounting and disbursement
of assets. This makes business more efficient as it frees resources for further use.
Contracts with quick turnaround would be dangerous to the economy, as short-term
thinking would lead to more competitive and less profitable collaboration, were it
not for the focus on the long-term value of reputation.
(cid:0)(cid:0)
31 Greif, private communication. June, MNMN.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

28 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
Third, maintaining a reputation system is a costly overhead for the network, but it
provides a catalyst for business. When meaningful reputation is part of the system,
people are willing to cooperate without performing the extra due-diligence analysis
on the agent and the other circumstances of the game. The opportunity to build rep-
utation means both the agent and the principal are incentivized to act as partners to
help each other profit, for the promise of future frictionless business opportunities.
The parties are willing to go above and beyond the stipulations of the contract to
build and protect reputation.
Finally, a focus on reputation instead of immediately fungible cash rewards encour-
ages decentralized organization because it disperses power, and it does so fairly. An-
yone with equivalent talent is equally acceptable in an anonymous business contract,
so anyone available can be given opportunities. Those who already have jobs are not
available, so the exponential concentration of power from the “rich-get-richer” ef-
fect is diminished. And meritocracy is encouraged by fair accounting and rewards.
Reputation may be enough to keep a homogenous group like the Maghribis to-
gether, despite the differentiating effect of competition for profit. But their coordi-
nation was devoted to the singular goal of a narrow type of trade. How can we main-
tain the power of decentralization when competing hierarchical structures are
temporarily more effective?
The U.S. Constitution’s dynamic hybrid solution
The struggle between centralization and decentralization is at the core of American
history. –Anthony Gregory
The decades leading to the foundation of the United States of America is a prime les-
son in the strengths and weaknesses of centralization and decentralization. The
choices of governance structures among the centralized British monarchy, the de-
centralized Articles of Confederation, and in the later hybrid centralized-decentral-
ized U.S. Constitution, illustrate the power of dynamic design for making an effective
and stable decentralized organization with integrated centralized elements.
The American Revolution was fought between the decentralized colonial rebels and
the centralized British Empire. The British Empire itself had a long unstable history of
internal revolt against its own centralized hierarchy. The British Empire had previ-
ously decentralized from its medieval feudal monarchy by dispersing power through
Parliament. During the preceding centuries, the monarchy lost power in a series of
revolts that redistributed power amongst property owners, the aristocracy (House of
Lords) and the knights (House of Commons). Parliament’s power rivaled and often
dominated the executive monarchy. As power tends to do under the differentiating
process of competition, without conscious protection, a hierarchy emerged as well in
Parliament amongst political factions.
By the time of the American Revolution, the landowning members of the Thirteen
Colonies felt the legislative branch hierarchy had become too tyrannical under the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 29
reign of King George III. The information technology of the time meant the center of
the British executive hierarchy was too distant to responsively govern the hierarchy
that included the American colonies. The transatlantic voyage of ink and parchment
letters gave latency from l to )_ weeks, one way. The printing press could store a
broadsheet of information within a few hours and transmission on the order of e
days throughout the colonies. More importantly, the press could disseminate unlim-
ited numbers of copies, which was a major democratizing force, decentralizing the
control of information. The colonists complained they had no representatives in Par-
liament. Information at the edge was not making its way up the hierarchy.
)e of the [e British colonies in North America chose to break off from the hierarchy
in )‘‘l, with the ratification of the Declaration of Independence. These )e contigu-
ous territories had similar cultures (Christian, mostly Protestant), administrative or-
ganization, and political concerns with Britain, so it was easier for the Thirteen Colo-
nies to communicate with each other, compared with the other nearby British
territories. (One of the articles in the Articles of Confederation allowed a specific
open seat for Canada to automatically become the )^th member of the rebellion, but
this clause was never exercised.)
During the ‘ years of rebellion, the Thirteen Colonies remained decentralized. The
Continental Congress was their legislative body organized under the political rules
called the Articles of Confederation. These Articles were consciously authored to
limit the authority of its weak central government which had no chief executive. This
made the war effort difficult because it meant the organization was very inefficient
at marshalling resources. Recognizing the value of executive power during war, the
colonies appointed George Washington the Commander in Chief of the Continental
Army. However, the autonomous members of the rebellion could not be coerced to
participate, to draft soldiers, to provide money or any other war materiel. Washing-
ton constantly and bitterly complained about this throughout the war.
The war produced the competitive circumstances that differentiate leaders in rank
and powers, and a military hierarchy organically emerged and gained power
throughout the war. Wary of the danger of centralizing power, however, the several
states retained independent control of their local militias, and were in charge of ap-
pointing leaders in the Continental Army up to the rank of colonel.
Nevertheless, the decentralized rebel organization, which enjoyed the support of
only ^Z% of the population in the colonies ()Y% loyal to the crown, ^Y% neutral),
eventually defeated the most powerful centralized organization in the world, the
British Empire, which would soon after become the largest empire in all history.
After their success, the Rebels knew future war was inevitable. In fact their capitol
was burned to the ground by Britain in )_)[. Recognizing the weakness and ineffi-
ciency of their decentralized response to the threat of war, the Thirteen Colonies re-
named themselves the United States of America and redrafted their political and le-
gal rules. This Constitution gave more power to the central government and set up a
hierarchical executive branch with a central leader. Conscious of the historical insta-
bility of a centralized hierarchy, however, and desperate to preserve the individual
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

30 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
freedoms they had fought for, the Constitution was drafted to include a dynamic de-
sign for decentralizing power.
The United States’ government has been remarkably stable. Despite many evident
failings, including full civil war, the Constitution has ruled over the nation with the
most diverse group of citizens ever assembled, over an enormous geography, with
great success. The U.S. Constitution is the oldest protocol-centralizing document of
any major contemporary country. This stability is particularly notable given its rigid,
Rule-of-Law legal system (as opposed to the Rule-of-Virtue legal systems of Egypt
and China).
The Constitution’s success is due to the harmonious marriage of centralized and de-
centralized organizing principles. A separation of powers into legislative, executive,
and judicial branches keeps power from concentrating in a single chief executive
monarch. Yet temporary hierarchies within each branch make them efficient and ef-
fective. Dynamic system design, including predictable transfers of power by term
limits and flattening of power through democratic elections, further decentralizes
political power in the organization.
Democracy itself decentralizes power. However, to bring unity to a large population
with diverse values, the United States has rigid protocol-centralization from a Rule-
of-Law legal system. Statutory law, explicitly and formally clarifying the limits of ac-
ceptable behavior, gives a level of fairness and transparency which helps unify a
large, diverse group of people, as it did YZZZ years ago to bring diverse tribes to-
gether in Mesopotamia.
However, these explicit rules lead to instability in the short-term day-to-day work-
ings of the nation and in the long-term multi-generational history of the country. The
founders consciously grappled with these problems and built several stabilizing pro-
tocols into the Constitution.
The U.S. Constitution institutes dynamic governance for long-term stability. This in-
cludes short-term and long-term protocols. An appeals process stabilizes short-term
cooperation (judicial). Long-term stabilization comes from the ability to amend
rules—including how the amendments themselves are made (legislative). For even
longer-term stabilization, transcendental values were consciously specified to guide
such higher-order legislative and judicial rulemaking. In particular, the founders high-
lighted the vague notions of freedom, equality, and good will (liberté, egalité, frater-
nité).
The second system that stabilizes the organization with dynamic design is the sepa-
ration of powers into the triumvirate of legislative, executive, and judicial branches.
Montesquieu’s radical system32 creates a dynamic design through a system of
(cid:0)(cid:0)
32 Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Law, Book XI, )abL, building on ideas from John Locke, Two Treatises
of Government, )iL\, who took ideas from much earlier democracies. The first well-documented de-
mocracies were in Greece. In the ith century BC, Athenian democracies split power in the same way
with a legislative branch, the ekklesia (which is the etymological root of the word ecclesiastic), the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 31
checks and balances. Power is balanced by splitting it between the three branches.
Power is checked, because each branch depends on the other to act, so that each
branch has cyclic power over the others. The legislative branch crafts the plans that
the executive branch is tasked with carrying out. The executive branch executes the
plans and pushes cases to the judicial branch for resolution. Resolution means the
judicial branch dictates what has happened. Given these judicial pronouncements,
the legislative branch is then tasked with developing new plans to respond to what
has happened. In computer science terms, the legislative branch updates the soft-
ware. Then the executive branch executes the software. The judicial branch deter-
mines the state of the system. The executive branch gives information transmission,
the legislative branch provides information processing, the judicial branch gives in-
formation storage.33
The separation of powers was consciously designed to prevent the system from nat-
urally devolving into a complete centralized hierarchy, despotism according to Mon-
tesquieu, or tyranny according to Madison.34 In the cyclical system, the powers of
each branch derive from the others. The natural human competitive impulse is har-
nessed to prevent any branch from usurping power not enumerated in the Constitu-
tion, the checks and balances to prevent centralization of power. “Ambition must be
made to counteract ambition.”35 This decentralization stabilizes the effect of the
rigid legal protocol centralization, and the centralized hierarchy inherent in each sep-
arate branch.
Dynamic design further stabilizes the system with the following mechanisms. First,
the power hierarchy is never permanently completed, because the leaders, particu-
larly the executive leader, are not permanently in charge. The president has term
limits. Second is democracy: the means by which the new central and legislative
leaders are chosen is by polling the electorate. The members at the very bottom of
(cid:0)(cid:0)
executive branch, boule (a council of representatives from the ten Athenian tribes), and the judicial
body, dikasteria, (whose jurors were selected by lottery).
33 This triumvirate of control reflects the psychological experience of an animal moving through its
environment. Information processing is our experience of thought (legislative), information storage is
our experience of perception (judicial), information communication is our experience of action (exec-
utive). The act of these processes working harmoniously together is life. (Incidentally, this is the foun-
dation for building strong AI.) “It may be a reflection on human nature, that such devices should be
necessary to control the abuses of government. But what is government itself, but the greatest of all
reflections on human nature?” –James Madison, Federalist No. [) (i February )aLL)
34 “There would be an end of everything, were the same man, or the same body, whether of the
nobles or of the people, to exercise those three powers, that of enacting laws, that of executing the
public resolutions, and of trying the causes of individuals.” –Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Law, Book
XI, )abL.
“The accumulation of all powers, Legislative, Executive, and Judiciary, in the same hands, whether of
one, a few, or many, and whether hereditary, self-appointed, or elective, may justly be pronounced
the very definition of tyranny.” –James Madison, Federalist No. ba (gN January )aLL)
35 James Madison, Federalist No. [) (i February )aLL)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

32 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
the hierarchy equally share ultimate authority.36 This formally ties the top of the po-
litical hierarchy to the bottom. The power structure is therefore cyclic. This stabilizes
the system by flattening the ultimate power distribution and adding dynamism to
the structure, to counteract the natural impulse toward becoming a static, rigid
power hierarchy. Finally, the explicit mechanisms by which the very rules we follow
can be changed are again split among the three branches. The legislative branch
writes the rules; the executive branch decides how to institute those rules; the judi-
cial branch reviews those rules. Thus, decentralization further stabilizes the process.
Both power decentralization and protocol decentralization are promoted using dy-
namic design in these several ways. This ameliorates the destabilizing effects of for-
mal rigorous laws with effective centralized hierarchies in each branch, particularly
the complex executive branch. This gives the benefits of both centralization and de-
centralization in political power and legal protocol.
However, the system is obviously not without flaws, especially because it is run by
humans.37 The process described above is merely the design of the system. People
are very clever. Given enough time, we will find workarounds for the rules to any
game. No matter how carefully rules are designed, we can subvert the intentions of
its authors, while still following the rules to the letter. That is reflected by a mathe-
matical fact called the Folk Theorems of Game Theory (see Chapter ^). When it
comes to games that really matter, games where money and property and power are
at stake, people are canny and avaricious. In practice, this game was subverted on
many levels before the ink on the Constitution’s ratification was dry.
As an uncontentious example, consider how the executive branch predictably over-
steps its bounds. In fact, this natural circumstance is why the whole system was de-
signed, to prevent the power hierarchy from centralizing around an individual. Pre-
dictably, the executive branch has become the most powerful, commanding far
more resources than the other branches combined. But the system was designed to
prevent this, partly by furnishing the legislative branch with the power to set the
budget.
During a crisis, the executive branch is naturally tasked with identifying the problem,
for example recognizing the need to go to war. The power of the executive is limited
by the requirement that the President petition the legislative branch for authoriza-
tion, funding, and instructions for how to execute the war. The legislature is suppos-
edly the only branch with the power to declare war, and it is supposedly required to
(cid:0)(cid:0)
36 “…the people are the only legitimate fountain of power” –James Madison, Federalist No. b\ (M Feb-
ruary )aLL)
37 “If men were angels, no government would be necessary…. In framing a government which is to be
administered by men over men, the great difficulty lies in this: you must first enable the government
to control the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself. A dependence on the people
is, no doubt, the primary control on the government; but experience has taught mankind the necessity
of auxiliary precautions.” –James Madison, Federalist No. [) (i February )aLL) Every engineer will tell
you building a machine for any task is easy, until humans are expected to use it.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 33
be periodically repetitioned for funding the war effort. But the executive branch has
periodically overstepped its powers, such as suspending habeas corpus or violating
the ^th amendment rights with citizen surveillance. When the executive branch is
given more centralizing power during a crisis, or simply takes it, the mechanism for
removing that power when the threat is over has rarely been followed. Large perma-
nent standing armies were inconceivable when the Constitution was designed.
Secondly, the system has been propped up by the external centralizing force of con-
stantly increasing power. The United States increased in territory until )mYm and con-
tinues to advance its influence through business, foreign policy, technological devel-
opment, and culture. Rapid westward expansion for more than a century to its
current political territory was rationalized by the idea of Manifest Destiny. When
there was a temporary time American power was seen as stagnating instead of
growing in the )m‘Zs, it was seen as a general national crisis. Today a major national
concern is that a new generation is predicted to be relatively less wealthy than their
parents, despite the fact that their material wealth is expanding, measured in abso-
lute terms of energy use, due to technological advances. Not all of the U.S. govern-
ment’s stability is due to the clever design of its rules.
The United States government is a decentralized organization, a DAO. Norway is a
DAO—the best DAO according to the democracy index.38 Mauritius, Uruguay, and
South Korea are also DAOs. Every functioning democracy is more akin to a DAO than
to a centralized corporation. To prove this, simply answer the question, “who owns
the U.S.”? A cynical answer might be something along the lines of “the military in-
dustrial complex” or “the corporations”. The US DAO has been operating continu-
ously for more than [ZZ years, so naturally there is corruptive rust that builds in
such an immense machine. Those answers hold more than a little truth. But the best
answer to who owns the power in the US is truly more along the lines of “the peo-
ple”.
There have been problems with our systems of democratic governance that were
identified while they were being built (the Federalist Papers) and immediately after
(deToqueville’s Democracy in America) and the criticisms have multiplied ever since.
Many of these criticisms are correct. Many of the flaws were unavoidable due to the
nature of the culture of the people the system needs to govern. Many of the flaws
were unavoidable due to the nature of the technologies that were available at the
time (voting, communication, recording). So, the systems adopted were flawed. Sys-
tems are always flawed and so need constant analysis and criticism. Many flaws are
due to inevitable corruption in any static system—even the dynamic system of tri-
partite checks and balances is relatively static in the second order, since the design
itself has been relatively fixed for two hundred years. We see a dissolution of clarity
as the branches overstep their established bounds: executives usurping legislative
(cid:0)(cid:0)
38 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Democracy_Index
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

34 (cid:0) Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization
power with line-item vetoes and military actions without Congressional authoriza-
tion; judges usurping legislative power by “legislating from the bench” and lawyers
usurping executive power by using the inefficiency of the courts to coerce opponents
with the threat of frivolous suits; and legislators preventing the executive from mak-
ing judicial appointments.
Many of these violations are easily explained by party factionalism, which was a
basic concern of the Founders, especially Madison. Duverger’s Law claims a plurality
voting system (whoever gets the most votes—the plurality—wins) leads inevitably to
two-party factions. In Federalist )Z, Madison argues the threat of factionalism (politi-
cal parties) in a democracy naturally leads to a Tyranny of the Majority emerging,
and that this can only be prevented in two ways. First by giving individuals further
autonomy, decentralizing interests and breaking up majorities by encouraging the
natural diversity of humanity. Second by filtering power to wiser individuals through
representative democracy. Wisdom was to be measured in proportion to their devo-
tion to encouraging individual autonomy. [)st century technology can encourage
both of these solutions using decentralized accounting for reputation.
Despite the corruption any system inevitably collects, the U.S. Constitution’s design
is a major reason for the success and stable governance of the nation for two centu-
ries of unpredictable history, during which its population has grown almost )ZZ-fold.
The dynamic design of the separated powers gives it stability through power decen-
tralization.
New systems that are emerging due to advances in information technology face
even greater challenges than the fledgling )_th century republic of former colonies,
the ))th century Maghribi traders, or the clans of Imperial China. Today, far larger
global networks of people are forming, open to members with diverse values and
backgrounds, commanding more power. Automated systems processing information
at light speed can now communicate globally and store voluminous details on mi-
nute transactions. These tools are expected to be harnessed to govern ever more so-
phisticated business arrangements in ever more complex technological situations
with ever more detailed information. How do we build governance systems which
remain stable in such dynamic environments? Protocol centralization is necessary to
display objective fairness, but this leads to instability. Lessons on decentralized dy-
namic design from the )‘th century, reputational systems over distant trade routes
on the Silk Road in the ))th century, and justice decentralization and transcendental
value adherence in Ancient China and Egypt help us to understand how these net-
works are stabilized. What else made it possible to create our current global net-
works? What else is needed to revitalize our democratic systems and build the suc-
cessful networks of the future?
Bibliography
Evans, Dave (Apr. 2011). The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing
Everything. CISCO White Paper, https://www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/in-
nov/IoT_IBSG_0411FINAL.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

Chapter ) – Historical Sketches of Centralization vs. Decentralization (cid:0) 35
Wikipedia. Last Universal Common Ancestor, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_universal_com-
mon_ancestor (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3782193

