REGULATION TOMORROW: WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN TECHNOLOGY IS
FASTER THAN THE LAW?
MARKFENWICK,* WULFA.KAAL,**ANDERIKP.M.VERMEULEN***
Inanageofconstant,complexanddisruptivetechnologicalinnovation,
knowing what, when, and howto structure regulatory interventionshas
become moredifficult.Regulators findthemselvesinasituationwhere
they believe theymustoptforeitherrecklessaction (regulation without
sufficient facts) or paralysis (doing nothing). Inevitably in such a case,
caution tends to trump risk. But such caution merely functions to
reinforce the status quo and makes it harder for new technologies to
reachthemarketinatimelyorefficientmanner.
The solution: lawmaking and regulatory design needs to become more
proactive, dynamic, and responsive. So how can regulators actually
achievethesegoals?Whatcanregulatorsdotopromoteinnovationand
offer better opportunities to people wanting to build a new business
around a disruptive technology or simply enjoy the benefits of a
disruptivenewtechnologyasaconsumer?
Introduction...............................................................................................562
II. DisruptiveInnovationintheLiterature................................................563
III. TheFactualBasisofModernRegulation...........................................567
A. FactsToday...............................................................................576
B. A“Post–FactSociety”?.............................................................583
IV. ThreePrinciplesforRegulationTomorrow........................................585
A. DataDrivenRegulatoryIntervention........................................585
B. APrinciple–BasedApproach....................................................589
C. TheMinimumRegulatory“Sandbox”......................................591
Conclusion.................................................................................................593
*KyushuUniversity(Fukuoka,Japan)
**UniversityofSt.ThomasSchoolofLaw(Minneapolis,USA)
*** Tilburg University; Tilburg Law and Economics Center; Philips
Lighting(Netherlands)
561
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

562 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
INTRODUCTION
Imaginethefollowingnearfutureexperienceofshoppingonline:
You are in a café thinking about a last minute birthday present for a
friend or relative who you will be meeting later that day. Using a
smartphone, you find something suitable via Amazon or similar web–
based retailer. You place the order, paying a slight premium for instant
delivery. Twenty minutes later you receive a notification that a drone
willbearrivingshortlyatadelivery–portclosetothecafé.Youmakethe
five minute walk to the designated meeting point. A drone then swoops
down beside you and releases the package having confirmed your
identityandlocationviaphoneconnection.
Most commentators seem to agree that the combination of online
transaction and drone delivery represents the future of fast, clean, and
efficientshopping.1
And yet, for the moment, this type of service is not available. Thinking
aboutsomeofthereasonswhythistechnologyisnotavailablecanteachus
something important about how we currently deal with disruptive
technologyandhowwe might want —or need—to adapt our approachto
a new world in which innovation cycles are shorter and new technology is
constantlybeingdeveloped.
Returning to the example of drone–based delivery, a major reason why
this type of service is not yet available is technological.2 Clearly, there are
technologicalissuesthat need to be overcome.3 For example,ensuringthat
theserviceisreliable andsafeiscrucialbefore fleetsof drones arereleased
on to the world. But even when all of the main technology issues are
1. See Tom Simonite, Amazon Lays Out Its Vision for a Sky Thronging with
Delivery Drones, MIT TECH. REV. (July 28, 2015), https://perma.cc/D9AR-DA4J
(quotingGurKimchi, acofounderof Amazon’sdroneproject,saying, “[w]ethinkit’s
going to be more economical, faster, environmentally sound, and that customers are
going to like it”); Sally French, Drone Delivery Is Already Here — and It Works,
MKT.WATCH(Dec.15,2015,7:32AM),https://perma.cc/57XC-EBT7(explaininghow
thedronedeliveryprocessmightwork).
2. Erik P.M. Vermeulen, Artificial Intelligence, FinTech, Big Data . . . Or, What
Happens When TechnologyisFaster than theLaw?, Emergent Future(Sept. 3, 2016),
https://medium.com/emergent-future/artificial-intelligence-fintech-big-data-or-what-
happens-when-technology-is-faster-than-the-6c2c1528738c#.k4ohle1im; Keith Wagst
aff, Could Drone Delivery Really Take Off? Experts Weigh In, NBC NEWS: MACH
(Nov. 15, 2016, 4:32 PM), http://www.nbcnews.com/mach/technology/could-drone-
delivery-really-catch-experts-weigh-n456806; Farhad Manjoo, Think Amazon’s Drone
Delivery Idea Is a Gimmick? Think Again, N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 10, 2016), https://
www.nytimes.com/2016/08/11/technology/think-amazons-drone-delivery-idea-is-
a-gimmick-think-again.html; Samuel Gibbs, Are Drone Deliveries a Realistic
Prospect?, GUARDIAN(July29, 2016), https://www.theguardian.com/te chnology/
2016/jul/29/are-drone-deliveries-a-realistic-prospect.
3. Vermeulen,supranote2.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 563
resolved there are other obstacles that can prevent consumers and
entrepreneurs from enjoying the benefits and opportunities offered by new
technologiesorservices,suchasdronedelivery.
Theseobstaclesarenottheresultoftechnologicallimitations,buthuman
choice. The law — and other regulations — can often prohibit, or
otherwise limit, commercial exploitation of, and public access to, new
technology. However, as disruptive technologies arrive more frequently
and at a faster pace, debates around such regulatory constraints on new
technologiesaremorepressing.4
II. DISRUPTIVEINNOVATIONINTHELITERATURE
Since the mid–1990s, the literature on management has studied the
implications of disruptive technologies and innovation.5 The literature
warned businesses to act quickly when disrupters appear by either
acquiring the disrupter or incubating a competing business that embraces
the disruptive technology, because disrupter startup companies could
attract new lower–end consumers by offering inexpensive substitutes for
products and gradually move upmarket by attracting higher-end
consumers.6 A lack of investment in disruptive technologies can result in
the abrupt loss of market dominance and often even total replacement in
suchmarkets.7 Whenmarketleadersdonotextendtheirmarketdominance
through the use of disruptive technologies, smaller entrepreneurial firms
with no established customer base can take advantage of disruptive
technologiesandredefinesuchmarkets.8
4. See Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation for Innovation, in PERSPECTIVES IN
LAW, BUSINESS & INNOVATION (Mark Fenwick et al. eds., forthcoming 2017)
[hereinafterKaal,Innovation].
5. See GEOFFREY A. MOORE, CROSSING THE CHASM (Harper Bus. 1991). See
generally CLAYTON M. CHRISTENSEN, THE INNOVATOR’S DILEMMA: WHEN NEW
TECHNOLOGIESCAUSEGREATFIRMSTOFAIL(Harv.Bus.Rev.Press1997).
6. LarryDownes&PaulNunes,Big-BangDisruption,91HARV.BUS.REV.44,46
(2013). Contra AndrewA. King&BaljirBaatartogokh, How Useful Is theTheoryof
Disruptive Innovation?, MITSLOANMGMT.REV. (Sept. 15, 2015), http://sloanreview.
mit.edu/article/how-useful-is-the-theory-of-disruptive-innovation (“In summary, alth-
ough Christensen and Raynor selected the 77 cases as examples of the theory of
disruptive innovation, our survey of experts reveals that many of the cases do not
correspond closelywith the theory. In fact, their responses suggest that onlyseven of
thecases(9%)containedallfourelementsofthetheorythatweaskedabout.”).
7. Joseph L. Bower & Clayton M. Christensen, Disruptive Technologies:
Catching the Wave, 73 HARV.BUS.REV. 43, 43 (1995) (“One of the most consistent
patterns in business is the failure of leading companies to stay at the top of their
industrieswhentechnologiesormarketschange.”).
8. Id. at 51 (“Small, hungry organizations are good at placing economical bets,
rolling with the punches, and agilely changing product and market strategies in
responsetofeedbackfrominitialforaysintothemarket.”);ConstantinosD.Charitou&
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

564 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
So–called big–bang disruptions differ from more–traditional innovation.
First, big–bang disruptors often offer more innovative products that are
cheaper and often better integrated with other products and services.9
Second, big–bang disrupters typically launch businesses without a
foundation, using cloud computing, open platforms built on the internet,
and fast–cycling mobile devices. Finally, big–bang disrupters often
produce multiplenewproductstoidentifywhichproducts maytake holdin
the market. While most such products will fail, the payoff associated with
the unconstrained growth of those products that succeed is substantial and
facilitatesandoftenacceleratesotherformsofdisruptiveinnovation.10
In the foreseeable future, artificial intelligence (“AI”) is likely the most
significant field of disruptive innovation. AI is different from a regular
computer algorithm. AI tries to emulate human thought processes and
rational human behavior through self–learning and storage of
experiences.11 Because it emulates human behavior, AI can act differently
in the same situations, depending on the actions previously performed.
However, AI still lacks the ability to engage in creative new ways of
combining previously learned contexts.12 The rapid advances of AI have
Constantinos C. Markides, Responses to Disruptive Strategic Innovation, MITSLOAN
MGMT.REV.(Jan.15,2003),http://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/responses-to-disruptive-
strategic-innovation (“[D]isruptive strategic innovations usually start out as small and
low–marginbusinesses. That’swhytheyrarelygainsupportorlong–termcommitment
from established competitors. The innovations are small and are not attractive until
theystartgrowing.”). ContraDownes&Nunes,Big–BangDisruption,supranote6,at
46 (explaining that the strategic model of disruptive innovation we’ve all become
comfortablewithhasablindspot. Itassumesthatdisruptersstartwithalower–priced,
inferior alternative that chips away at the least profitable segments, giving an
incumbent business time to start a skunkworks and develop its own next–generation
products. That advice hasn’t been much help to navigation–product makers like
TomTom, Garmin, and Magellan. Free navigation apps, now preloaded on every
smartphone, are not only cheaper but better than the stand–alone devices those
companies sell. And thanks to the robust platform provided by the iOS and Android
operating systems, navigation apps are constantly improving, with new versions
distributedautomaticallythroughthecloud).
9. Downes&Nunes,supranote6,at46.
10. Seeid.
11. See Paulius Cerka et al., Liability for Damages Caused by Artificial
Intelligence, 31 COMPUTER L. & SEC. REV. 376, 378 (2015). See generally STUART
RUSSELL&PETERNORVIG,ARTIFICIALINTELLIGENCE: AMODERNAPPROACH5(2013)
(describing the different major definitions for AI); Robert D. Hof, 10 Breakthrough
Technologies 2013: Deep Learning With Massive Amounts of Computational Power,
Machines Can Now Recognize Objects and Translate Speech in Real Time. Artificial
Intelligence is Finally Getting Smart, MITTECH.REV., http://www.technologyreview
.com/featuredstory/513696/deep-learning/(lastvisitedSept.27,2017).
12. Jeanne Carstensen, Robots Can’t Dance: Why the Singularity Is Greatly
Exaggerated, Nautilus (Jan. 22, 2015), http://nautil.us/issue/20/creativity/robots-cant-
dance("Wemaybemakingprogressinbeingabletodothingslikerecognizeacatina
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 565
already affected many of the sectors of the economy during the past
decade.13 TheexponentialdevelopmentofAIandtheassociateddisruptive
innovation pose substantial challenges for policy makers in education,
financialmarkets,labormarkets,andotherareas.14
Big data in combination with AI and machine learning is a significant
driverofdisruptiveinnovation.15 Bigdataintheformofdigitizeddatathat
grows at exponential rates and can be captured and manipulated
electronically draws on several core sources including the internet of
things, public records, social media, and cameras, as well as satellite
tracking.16 Downsides associated with big data include its use of such
photograph. But there’s a huge gulf between that and doing something creative.");
MargaretA.Boden,ArtificialCreativity: WhyComputersAren’tClosetoBeingReady
to Supplant Human Artists, MITTECH.REV. (Oct. 20, 2015), https://www.technology
review.com/s/542281/artificial-creativity/;MargaretA.Boden,CreativityandArtificial
Intelligence, 103 ARTIFICIALINTELLIGENCE 347, 355 (1998), ("These two bottlenecks
interact,sincesubtlevaluationrequiresconsiderabledomainexpertise. Valuation,thus
far, is mostly implicit in the generative procedures used by the program, or
interactively imposed by a human being. Only a few AI-models can critically judge
theirownoriginalideas. Andhardlyanycancombineevaluationwithtransformation.
The ultimate vindication of AI-creativity would be a program that generated novel
ideas which initiallyperplexed oreven repelled us,but whichwas abletopersuadeus
thattheywereindeedvaluable. Weareaverylongwayfromthat.").
13. See Craig E. Karl, The ThreeBreakthroughs That Have Finally Unleashed AI
ontheWorld,WIRED(Oct.27,2014,6:30AM),http://www.wired.com/2014/10/future-
of-artificial-intelligence/ (“Over the past five years, cheap computing, novel
algorithms, and mountains of data have enabled new AI–based services that were
previouslythedomainofsci–fiandacademicwhitepapers.”).
14. See ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON & ANDREW MCAFEE, THE SECOND MACHINE AGE:
WORK, PROGRESS, AND PROSPERITY IN A TIME OF BRILLIANT TECHNOLOGIES 205–28
(2014)(discussingpolicyin thefaceofprojected automationof low–skill labor); Tess
Townsend, Peter Diamandis: A.I. WillLead to MassiveDisruption Across Industries,
INC.(Sept.24,2015),http://www.inc.com/tess-townsend/diamandis-artificial-intelligen
ce.html.
15. SeeJames Canton, FromBig Data to Artificial Intelligence: TheNext Digital
Disruption, HUFFINGTON POST, http://www.huffingtonpost.com/james-canton/from-
big-data-to-artifici_b_10817892.html (last updated July 6, 2017); Jitendra Waral,
Anurag Rana & Sean Handrahan, Artificial Intelligence: Disruption Era Begins,
BLOOMBERG PROF.SERVS.: BLOOMBERGINTELLIGENCE(Sept. 29, 2016), https://www
.bloomberg.com/professional/blog/artificial-intelligence-disruption-era-begins/;
Rebecca Merrett, Intelligent Machines Part 1: Big Data, Machine Leaning and the
Future, CIO (June 4, 2015), http://www.cio.com.au/article/576664/intelligent-
machines-part-1-big-data-machine-learning-future/.
16. See Townsend, supra note 14; JOHN PODESTA ET. AL., EXEC. OFFICE OF THE
PRESIDENT,BIGDATA: SEIZINGOPPORTUNITIES,PRESERVINGVALUES53(2014),(“Big
datatechnologies,togetherwiththesensorsthatrideonthe‘InternetofThings,’pierce
many spaces that were previously private. Signals from home WiFi networks reveal
how many people are in a room and where they are seated.”). See generally JAMES
MANYIKA ET AL., BIG DATA: THE NEXT FRONTIER FOR INNOVATION, COMPETITION,
ANDPRODUCTIVITY15(McKinseyGlob.Inst.,2011).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

566 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
disparate sources, which creates challenges for the integration of data and
normalizing.17 The literature mostly takes issue with the big data
inaccuracies that occur when collecting data from databases that merely
require generalized accuracy.18 Big data is often not the output of
instruments designed to generate valid and reliable data suitable for
scientific analysis. Foundational data issues of construct validity,
measurement, reliability, and data dependencies are the same regardless of
data quantities.19 Some critique the implicit assumption of big data
researchers that big data is a substitute for traditional data collection and
analysis rather than a mere supplement,20 while others see big data and
small data not as mutually exclusive, but as reinforcing and supporting
17. MANYIKA ET AL., supra note 16, at 12 (“To capture value from big data,
organizations will have to deploy new technologies (e.g., storage, computing, and
analytical software) and techniques (i.e., new types of analyses). The range of
technologychallenges and thepriorities set fortacklingthemwilldifferdependingon
the data maturity of the institution. Legacy systems and incompatible standards and
formats too often prevent the integration of data and the more sophisticated analytics
thatcreatevaluefrombigdata. Newproblemsandgrowingcomputingpowerwillspur
the development of new analytical techniques. There is also a need for ongoing
innovation in technologies andtechniques that will help individuals and organizations
tointegrate,analyze,visualize,andconsumethegrowingtorrentofbigdata.”);seealso
Christian Bizer et al., The Meaningful Use of Big Data: Four Perspectives — Four
Challenges, 40 SIGMOD REC. 56, 57 (2011) (“My challenge is meaningful data
integration in the real, messy, often schema–less, and complex Big Data World of
databases and the (Semantic) Web using multi–disciplinary, multi–technology
methods.”).
18. See Bizer et al., supra note 17, at 57; IAN AYRES, SUPERCRUNCHERS: WHY
THINKING–BY–NUMBERSISTHENEWWAYTOBESMART60–63(2007)(identifyingbig
data phenomenon). See generally Andrea Lancichinetti et al., High–Reproducibility
and High–Accuracy Method for Automated Topic Classification, 5 PHYSICALREV.X
011007 (2015) (detailing the inaccuracy problems associated with big data text
analysis/machinereading(calledLDA)).
19. See David Lazer et al., The Parable of Google Flu: Traps in Big Data
Analysis, 343 SCI. 1203 (2014); Gary Marcus & Ernest Davis, Eight (No, Nine!)
Problems with Big Data, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 6, 2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014
/04/07/opinion/eight-no-nine-problems-with-bigdata.h tml (suggesting that “[r]eliable
statisticalinformationcanbecompiledaboutcommontrigrams,preciselybecausethey
appearfrequently. Butnoexistingbodyofdatawilleverbelargeenoughtoincludeall
the trigrams that people might use, because of the continuing inventiveness of
language.”);TimHarford,BigData: AreWeMakingaBigMistake?,FIN.TIMES(Mar.
28, 2014), https://www.ft.com/content/21a6e7d8-b479-11e3-a09a-00144feabdc0#axzz
30INfAyMi (“Statisticians have spent the past 200 years figuring out what traps liein
waitwhenwetrytounderstandtheworldthroughdata. Thedataarebigger,fasterand
cheaperthesedays —but wemust not pretend that thetrapshaveall been madesafe.
Theyhavenot.”).
20. JeffLeek, WhyBig Data IsinTrouble: TheyForgotAboutAppliedStatistics,
SIMPLY STATS. (May 7, 2014), http://simplystatistics.org/2014/05/07/why-big-data-is-
in-trouble-they-forgot-about-applied-statistics/ (“Statistical thinking has also been
conspicuouslyabsentfrommajorpublicbigdataeffortssofar.”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 567
eachother.21 Bigdatashortcomingscanlargelybeaddressedwithartificial
intelligence, and the combination of big data and artificial intelligence
opens up significant additional big data applications.22 Being able to
analyze entire populations via big data applications, rather than being
requiredto dealwithlimitedsamplesizes,allowsresearchersto understand
correlations that are completely unprecedented and can help revolutionize
ourworld.23
III. THEFACTUALBASISOFMODERNREGULATION
Reforming the regulatory framework to address increasing and growing
regulatory concerns associated with disruptive technologies becomes
increasingly important. Designinga regulatoryframeworkthat ensures the
safety of users and the public, whilst facilitating the commercial use and
consumer enjoyment of disruptive innovation is by no means easy.24 This
is particularly true in contemporary settings, where innovation is quicker
and the global dissemination of that technology is much faster.25 In such
21. Lazeretal.,supranote19,at1205.
22. Jo Ann S. Barefoot, Disrupting Fintech Law, 18 FINTECHL.REP. 3, 6 (2015);
DanielE.O’Leary,ArtificialIntelligenceandBigData,28IEEEINTELLIGENTSYS.96,
97, 99 (2013) (“AI researchers have long been interested in building applications that
analyzeunstructureddata,andinsomehowcategorizingorstructuringthatdatasothat
the resulting information can be used directly to understand a process or to interface
with other applications. As an example, Johan Bollen and Huina Mao [footnote
omitted]foundthatstockmarketpredictionsoftheDowJonesIndustrialaveragewere
improved by considering the overall ‘sentiment’ of the stock market — this is an
unstructuredconcept, butbasedonstructureddatagenerated fromGoogle.”); Maryam
M.Najafbadietal.,DeepLearningApplicationsandChallengesinBigDataAnalytics,
2 J. BIGDATA1, 11 (2015)(“[P]erformingdiscriminativetasks in BigDataAnalytics
one can use Deep Learning algorithms to extract complicated nonlinear features from
the raw data, and then use simple linear models to perform discriminative tasks using
the extracted features as input. This approach has two advantages: (1) extracting
features with Deep Learning adds nonlinearity to the data analysis, associating the
discriminativetaskscloselytoArtificialIntelligence,and(2)applyingrelativelysimple
linear analytical models on the extracted features is more computationally efficient,
whichisimportantforBigDataAnalytics.”).
23. SeegenerallyKENNETHCUKIER&VIKTORMAYER–SCHONBERGER,BIGDATA:
AREVOLUTIONTHATWILLTRANSFORMHOWWELIVE,WORKANDTHINK(2013).
24. AnnaButenko&PierreLarouche,RegulationforInnovativenessorRegulation
ofInnovation?,7L.INNOVATIONANDTECH.52,72(2015).
25. Rita McGrath, The Paceof Technology Adoption is Speeding Up, HARV.BUS.
REV. (Nov. 25, 2013), https://hbr.org/2013/11/the-pace-of-technology-adoption-is-
speeding-up; Drew Desilver, Chart of the Week: The Ever–Accelerating Rate of
Technology Adoption, PEW RES. CTR. (Mar. 14, 2014), http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2014/03/14/chart-of-the-week-the-ever-accelerating-rate-of-technology-
adoption/. ButseeBronwynH.Hall&BeethikaKhan,AdoptionofNewTechnology1
(Nat’lBureauofEcon.Research,WorkingPaperNo.9730,2003)(explainingthatthe
diffusionoftechnologyusually“appearsasacontinuousandratherslowprocess”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

568 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
circumstances, regulators can often struggle to keep up.26 The last two
decades offer multiple examples of such regulatory struggles: genetically
modifiedfood,artificialintelligence,and,ofcourse,driverlesscars.27
AI and its disruptive capabilities present a prominent example for the
possibledisruptivepotentialandregulatorychallengesassociatedwithsuch
disruption in the existing regulatory framework. Because national and
international law do not currently recognize AI as a subject of law, AI has
no legal personality and as such cannot be held personally liable for
damages.28 With autonomous AI playing an expanding role in society, an
increasing number of scientists and entrepreneurs suggest that government
regulation may be necessary to reduce the risks to the public associated
with the rapid advances in AI.29 While some favor an indirect form of AI
26. See BRADEN A. ALLENBY, THE GROWING GAP BETWEEN EMERGING
TECHNOLOGIES AND LEGAL–ETHICALOVERSIGHT: THE PACING PROBLEM 3 (Gary E.
Marchant et al. eds. 2011) (“Moore’s Law notoriously states that the ‘functional
capacity of ICT products roughly doubles every18 months’, with the same dynamics
manifesting in biotechnology, and namelyin sequencinghuman genome. As aresult,
regulating innovation involves what is called a ‘pacing problem’ in the academic
literature from the US, or the ‘challenge of regulatory connection’ or ‘regulatory
disconnection’inEuropean–basedscholarship.”);Butenko&Larouche,supranote24,
at 66 (“The ‘pacing problem’ commonly refers to the situation when technology
develops faster than the corresponding regulation, the latter hopelesslyfalling behind.
The metaphor of ‘the hare and the tortoise’ is often conjured up. As summed up by
Marchant and Wallach, ‘at the rapid rate of change, emerging technologies leave
behindtraditionalgovernmentalregulatorymodelsandapproacheswhichareplodding
alongslowertodaythaneverbefore’.”).
27. See GREGORY N. MANDEL ET AL., INNOVATIVE GOVERNANCE MODELS FOR
EMERGINGTECHNOLOGIES44,45(GaryE.Marchantetal.eds.2013)(“Oneobstacleto
thisgoalisthatnewtechnologiesareoftenmetwithhighlypolarizeddebatesoverhow
tomanagetheirdevelopment,useandregulation. Prominentexamplesincludenuclear
energyandgeneticallymodifiedfoods.”);seeid.,at136(“Emergingtechnologiessuch
as nanotechnology, biotechnology, personalized medicine, synthetic biology, applied
neuroscience, geoengineering, social media, surveillance technologies, regenerative
medicine,roboticsandartificialintelligencepresentcomplexgovernanceandoversight
challenges. These technologies are characterized by a rapid pace of development, a
multitude of applications, manifestations and actors, pervasive uncertainties about
risks, benefits andfuturedirections, anddemandsforoversight rangingfrompotential
health and environmental risks to broader social and ethical concerns. Given this
complexity,nosingleregulatoryagency,orevengroupofagencies,canregulateanyof
these emerging technologies effectively and comprehensively.”); Tracy Hresko Pearl,
Fast & Furious: The Misregulation of Driverless Cars 1, 50 (Aug. 5, 2016)
(unpublished manuscript) (SSRN Working Paper), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2819473 (“The United States is on the cusp of a revolution in
transportation. The sale and widespread use of both semi–autonomous and fully
autonomous vehicles, also known as ‘driverless cars,’ are both imminent and likelyto
significantlychangethewayinwhichcitizenscommute,interact,andtravel.”).
28. SeePearlsupranote27.
29. See Sharon Gaudin, A.I. Researchers Say Elon Musk’s Fears ‘Not Completely
Crazy’, COMPUTERWORLD(Oct. 29,2014,1:16PM), http://www.computerworld.com/
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 569
regulation based on differential tort liability,30 others oppose rigid
regulation of AI because regulation may inhibit the socially beneficial
innovations associated with AI, or they suggest such regulation is
impossible in the face of such a powerful and exponentially growing
technology.31 While AI is currently not able to match human–level
reasoning,32andfortheforeseeablefuture,lackstheabilitytobecreative,it
canstillhaveanimpactontheserviceindustries,amongothers.33
To take an even simpler, but nevertheless important, example: current
rules in many jurisdictions do not allow self–driving cars on the roads.
Making this change is relatively simple. For example, the 1968 Vienna
Conventionon Road Traffic, to whichseventy-two countries are party, was
amendedinMarch2014totakesuchnewtechnologiesintoconsideration.34
However, there are many other more complex regulatory issues that will
needtobeaddressed. Thedriverlesscarwillgenerateanenormousamount
of data for possible alternative usage, which is likely to create new issues
related to data security and privacy concerns.35 In a tort context, questions
article/2840815/ai-researchers-say-elon-musks-fears-not-completely-crazy.htmlgoo.gl/
3K91LD (“‘I think we should be very careful about artificial intelligence,’ Musk said
when answering a question about the state of AI. ‘If I were to guess at what our
biggest existential threat is, it’s probablythat . . . [w]ith artificial intelligence, we are
summoning the demon. In all those stories with the guy with the pentagram and the
holy water, and he’s sure he can control the demon. It doesn’t work out.’”); Rory
Cellan–Jones, Stephen Hawking Warns Artificial Intelligence Could End Mankind,
BBC NEWS (Dec. 2, 2014), http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540 (“The
developmentoffullartificialintelligencecouldspelltheendofthehumanrace.”).
30. See Matthew U. Scherer, Regulating Artificial Intelligence Systems: Risks,
Challenges,Competencies,andStrategies,29HARV.J.L.&TECH.353,393(2016).
31. SeeYou,Robot?,ECONOMIST(Sept. 1,2012),http://www.economist.com/node
/21560986(“Regulatorsmusttreadcarefully. NoelSharkey,acomputerscientistatthe
University of Sheffield, observes that overly rigid regulations might stifle innovation.
But a lack of legal clarity leaves device–makers, doctors, patients and insurers in the
dark. The RoboLaw researchers hope to square this circle when they deliver their
findings in 2014. So far, though, they seem to have more questions than answers.”).
SeegenerallyJohnDanaher,IsRegulationofArtificialIntelligencePossible?,HUMAN.
+ MAG. (July 15, 2015), http://hplusmagazine.com/2015/07/15/is-regulation-of-
artificial-intelligence-possible/.
32. Richard Waters, Artificial Intelligence: Machinev. Man, FIN.TIMES(Oct. 31,
2014),https://www.ft.com/content/abc942cc-5fb3-11e4-8c27-00144feabdc0.
33. HarrySurden,MachineLearningandLaw,89WASH.L.REV.87,88(2014).
34. Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, art. 31, May 23, 1969, 1155
U.N.T.S. 331, 8 I.L.M. 679. See generally Economic and Social Counsel, Inland
Transportation Committee, Working Party on Road Traffic Safety, U.N. Doc.
ECE/TRANS/WP.1/145(Mar.24-6,2014);PressRelease,UNECE,UNECEpavesthe
wayforautomateddrivingbyupdatingUNinternationalconvention(Mar.23,2016).
35. MarkvanRijmenam,Self–drivingCarsWillCreate2PetabytesofData,What
Are The Big Data Opportunities for the Car Industry?, DATAFLOQ (July 18, 2016),
https://datafloq.com/read/self-driving-cars-create-2-petabytes-data-annually/172 (“The
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

570 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
will need to be resolved as to who is at fault in the event of an accident
involvingdriverlesscars.36
Moreover, driverless cars will need to communicate both among
themselvesandwiththetransportinfrastructuretobemosteffectiveintheir
operation. To facilitate this, regulators will need to safeguard
telecommunication frequencies and protect against security threats, most
obviouslythepossibilityof“car–hacking.”37
Thisallseemsfairlyobvious. Butaless–documentedaspectofthisissue
self–driving car from Google already is a true data creator. With all the sensors to
enablethecartodrivewithoutadriver,itgeneratesnearly1Gigabyteeverysecond. It
uses all that data to know where to drive and how fast to drive. It can even detect a
newcigarettebutt thrownontheground and itthenknows that aperson might appear
all of a sudden from behind a corner or car. 1 Gigabyte per second, imagine the
amountofdatathatwillcreateeveryyear: Onaverage,Americansdrive600hoursper
year in their car. That equals 2.160.000 seconds or approximately 2 Petabyte of data
percarperyear. Withtheamountofcarsworldwidetosurpassonebillion,itisalmost
unimaginable how much data will be created when Google’s self–driving car will
become common on the streets.”); Adrienne LaFrance, How Self–Driving Cars Will
Threaten Privacy, ATLANTIC (Mar. 21, 2016), http://www.theatlantic.com/technology
/archive/2016/03/self-driving-cars-and-the-looming-privacy-apocalypse/474600/ (“The
companies building self-vehicles have been cagey, so far, about how they’re thinking
aboutusingindividualdata.”).
36. See Adam Thierer & Ryan Hagemann, Removing Roadblocks to Intelligent
VehiclesandDriverlessCars,5WAKEFORESTJ.L.&POL’Y339,340(2015)(“Living
in fearofhypothetical worst–casescenarios and basingpolicyon themwill mean that
the best–case scenarios associated with intelligent vehicles will never come about.
Thus,patienceandregulatoryforbearancearegenerallythewisepolicydispositionsat
thistime,bearinginmindthatthetortsystemwillcontinuetoevolvetoaddressharms
caused by intelligent–vehicle systems.”); see also Bryant Walker Smith, Proximity–
Driven Liability, 102 GEO. L.J. 1777 (2014) (“This Article first describes how
companies are embracing new technologies that expand their information, access, and
control, with primary reference to the increasingly automated and connected motor
vehicle. It next analyzes how this proximity to product, user, and use could impact
product–relatedclaimsforbreachofimpliedwarranty,defectindesignorinformation,
post–sale failure to warn or update, and negligent enabling of a third–party’s tortious
behavior.”).
37. SeeJeffreyK. Gurney, Driving intotheUnknown: ExaminingtheCrossroads
of Criminal Law and Autonomous Vehicles, 5 WAKE FOREST J.L. & POL’Y 393, 433
(2015)(“In addition to physicallyinterfering with an autonomous vehicle, people will
beableto virtuallyinterferewith the operation of an autonomous vehicle, also known
as hacking.”); see also Tom Simonite, Your Future Self–Driving Car Will Be Way
More Hackable, MITTECH.REV. (Jan. 26, 2016), https://www.technologyreview.com
/s/546086/your-future-self-driving-car-will-be-way-more-hackable/ (“‘We are a long
wayfromsecuringthenon–autonomousvehicles,letalonetheautonomousones,’said
StefanSavage,acomputerscienceprofessorattheUniversityofCalifornia,SanDiego,
attheEnigmasecurityconferenceinSanFranciscoonTuesday. Theextracomputers,
sensors,andimprovedInternetconnectivityrequiredtomakeacardriveitselfincrease
thepossibleweakpoints,hesaid. ‘Theattacksurfaceforthesethings is even worse,’
saidSavage.”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 571
concerns what we might think of as the basis or foundation of any
regulation,namelysomeempiricalfactsaboutthattechnologyanditslikely
social, economic or health effects.38 In this respect, regulation is always
premisedonaselectionofrelevantfactsaboutaparticulartechnology.
Crucially, the selected facts are those that are seen as relevant by the
regulators in deciding what, when and how they should make a regulatory
intervention.
The “what question” concerns identifying the disruptive technology that
must be regulated or requires regulatory reform.39 Demarcating the scope
ofatechnologymaynotalwaysbeself–evident.Forexample,whenshould
a car be thought of as autonomous, rather than merely providing driver–
assistance? Facts about a particular technology are crucial for this kind of
definitionaljudgment.
The “when question” concerns the timing of any regulatory
intervention.40 Thisentailsensuringthat regulationis not adoptedtoosoon
38. Andrew Askland, Why Law and Ethics Need to Keep Pace with Emerging
Technologies,inTHEGROWINGGAPBETWEENEMERGINGTECHNOLOGIESANDLEGAL–
ETHICAL OVERSIGHT: THE PACING PROBLEM, xix, xx (Gary E. Marchant et al. eds.,
Springer. 2011) (“Accelerating advances in science and technology exacerbate the
problemofunrevisedstatutes,butthecruxoftheproblemisthesame: adissymmetry
between law and newly arising facts because the law has not anticipated these new
factsandattemptstogovernthemwithanantiquatedgraspoftheirmeaning. Reprising
thedescriptionof lawas thematchingof facts and principles,thechallengeforlawis
to be keenlyattentive to new facts in order to fashion principles that will sort out the
challengesthattheypresent.”).
39. Alberto Alemanno et al., Conclusions, in BETTERBUSINESSREGULATIONINA
RISK SOCIETY 285, 287 (Alberto Alemanno et al. eds., 2013) (“The concept of trust
shapesnotonlytherelationshipbetween regulators andregulated (e.g. pharmaceutical
industry),butalsotheveryobject(i.e.the‘what’question)ofpolicies.”).
40. Lyria Bennett Moses, Agents of Change: How the Law ‘Copes’ with Techno
logicalChange,20GRIFFITHL.REV.763,768-69(2011)(“Theurgeforlegalchangein
response to technological change has a greater sense of timing: laws regulating
railroadsareonlyneededaftertrackislaid;uncertaintiesrelatingtothesplitofgenetic
and gestational motherhood need onlyberesolved in responseto theavailabilityof in
vitrofertilisation. Thereisnodoubtthatlegalchangemaybedemandedasaresultof
changes in our collective knowledge and beliefs, or social change more broadly, but
differences in how such changes are timed and perceived (as well as limitations of
space)explainwhythisarticlefocusesonlyonpartofthestory(whichisnottosaythat
it might not, in some places, have a broader resonance).”); see SHRUPTISHAHETAL.,
THE REGULATOR OF TOMORROW, DELOITTE 2, 3 (June 11, 2015) (“The exponential
pace of technological change. New technologies that used to have two–year cycle
times nowcan becomeobsoletein sixmonths, and thepaceof changeis not slowing.
Moore’s Lawposits that computerprocessingpowerwill doubleeverytwo years, and
thisexponentialrateofincreasehasalsobeenshowntoholdtrueinindustriesbeyond
computing. Whencombinedwithsoftwarethatis‘eatingtheworld,’newtechnologies
can be developed, deployed, and iterated faster than ever. This presents a unique
timing challenge for regulatory agencies: Regulate too early and you risk stymieing
innovators; wait too long and you risk losing the opportunityto regulate a technology
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

572 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
and stifles or distorts technological development, but not so late that
problems arise as a result of the absence of effect regulation. The time
frame for rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure is largely
inadequate to address regulatory challenges associated with disruptive
innovation. While rulemakers may be able to update regulations and
regulatory guidance to address regulatory issues created by disruptive
innovation, given the exponential nature of disruptive innovation, they are
less able to adequately update existing rules in the existing regulatory
framework where regulators and commentators are engaged in a long,
drawn–out feedback process that involves hearings, proposed rules, the
submissionofcommentletters,beforefinallyagencylawyersfinalizearule
after considering the comments.41 Formal rulemaking is simply too time–
consuming.42 The speedof product innovation makes it possible to bringa
new product to market while formal rulemaking in the existing regulatory
infrastructure, taking months and often years of regulatory procedure, is
still dealing with the last product launch. New regulations pertaining to an
innovativeproductcouldbeobsoletebeforetheyarefinalized.43
The “how question” is about the form and substance of the regulation.44
orservicebeforeitbecomes widespread,potentiallyharmingconsumers ormarkets in
theinterim.”).
41. Lynn E. Blais & Wendy E. Wagner, Emerging Science, Adaptive Regulation,
andtheProblemofRulemakingRuts,86TEX.L.REV.1701,1706(2008).
42. Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, 98 MICH. L. REV.
303,371(1999)(“Withrespecttosystematiceffects: Agreatdealofattentionhasbeen
paid to thephenomenon of the‘ossification’ of notice–and–comment rulemaking, and
indeed a high priority, for the future of administrative law, is to devise means to
overcome the problem. Originally intended as a quick and effective alternative to
formal, on–the–record rulemaking, executive and especially judicial innovations have
converted notice–and–comment rulemaking into an exceptionally time–consuming
affair, often consuming many years, frequently half a decade and more. In fact EPA
estimates that informal rulemakingtypicallytakes five years.”); Thomas O. McGarity,
Some Thoughts on “Deossifying” the Rulemaking Process, 41 DUKEL.J. 1385, 1385
(1992) (“Although informal rulemaking is still an exceedingly effective tool for
elicitingpublicparticipationinadministrativepolicymaking,ithasnotevolvedintothe
flexibleandefficientprocessthatitsearlysupportersoriginallyenvisioned. Duringthe
last fifteen years the rulemaking process has become increasingly rigid and
burdensome.”).
43. Barefoot,supranote22,at10.
44. SeeJuliaBlack,FormsandParadoxesofPrinciplesBasedRegulation,LSEL.,
SOC’Y&ECON.WORKINGPAPERS1,14(2008)(“Arule,anyrule—legalornon–legal,
issuedbyaregulatororformedwithinafirm—hasanumberofdifferentdimensions.
Thesearefirstitssubstance: whatitconcerns.Second,itsstatus: whetheritislegally
binding or not, and the sanction, if any, which attaches to its breach. Third, its
character, whether it prohibits, permits, discourages or mandates certain behaviour.
Fourth, its linguistic structure: whether the language which the rule uses is vague or
precise,whethertheruleissimpleorcomplexinitsrequirements,whetheritslanguage
isclearandeasilyunderstood,oropaque.”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 573
Shouldthetechnologicalinnovationbe encouraged,prohibitedorrestricted
in some way? And what substantive rules or principles should be adopted
to achieve this regulatory goal? The existing regulatory infrastructure
cannot sufficiently distinguish and harness beneficial innovation. In fact,
the existing rulemaking process often prohibits ex parte communications,45
involves very little brainstorming, and undermines innovation.46 Because
technological transition is going to be a permanent state in the age of
disruptive innovation, rulemakers’ inability to address regulatory issues
associated with disruptive innovation will likely generate high levels of
legal uncertainty and inconsistency47 that inhibit innovation during
technological transition periods. The current regulatory framework lacks a
mechanism that succinctly and anticipatorily informs rulemakers of
beneficialinnovativeideas.
In each case, these policy judgments are made by politicians and
bureaucrats based — in large part — on facts provided by experts. The
delegation of regulatory decisions to a combination of democratically
chosen politicians and bureaucrat–experts is one way of conceptualizing
thedistinctivenessofpoliticalmodernity.
In this context, however, we are more interested in the identification of
the relevant facts. Some of the relevant facts may be obvious. The fact
that drones may interfere with low flying planes or inadvertently land on
innocent bystanders, for example, makes establishing reliable information
on the likelihood of such occurrences vital. However, there are various
potential problems with this fact–identification exercise. Some facts may
be difficult to empirically establish or contested, even amongst experts in
45. 5 U.S.C. § 557(d)(1) (2012); Ex Parte Communications in Informal Rule-
making Proceedings (Recommendation 77–3), 42 Fed. Reg. 54,251, 54,253 (Oct. 5,
1977) (listing other advantages associated with restraining ex parte communications,
including reducing possibility of unfair influence over decision makers and affording
interested parties opportunity to respond to information relied upon in the decision–
makingprocess).
46. See Peter H. Schuck, When the Exception Becomes the Rule: Regulatory
Equity and the Formulation of Energy Policy Through an Exceptions Process, 1984
DUKE L.J. 163, 197 (1984) (“Hastily prepared, overbroad rules can be disastrous for
those who technically are covered by the rules but to whom the rules should not, in
justice or sound policy, be applied. Inflexible application of such rules may quickly
creategravecompetitivedistortions,perhapsevendrivingfirmsoutofbusinessbefore
the rules can be refined or eliminated.”); see also Blais & Wagner, supra note 41, at
1705(“Agenciesareincreasinglyturningtoevenmoreinformalmethods—whichlack
adequateopportunitiesforpublicparticipationandevademeaningfuljudicialoversight
— to promulgate important policies. And, not surprisingly, agencies are increasingly
reluctant to revisit rules after enactment, even if the factual or policy predicates
underlyingthemhavechanged.”).
47. Barefoot,supranote22,at9.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

574 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
that field. The task of establishing facts about new technology may be
made difficult by the lack of an adequate sample or other reliable data on
theeffectsofnewtechnology.48
Identification of relevant or irrelevant facts may also be distorted or
otherwise influenced by the concerns of entrenched interests about new
(andcommerciallythreatening)technologies.
Finally, other facts may be — to quote Donald Rumsfeld — “unknown
unknowns.”49 We simply lack the experience or imagination to predict
what negative possibilities may be associated with a piece of new
technology.50
In this respect, the “relevant facts” that form the basis of regulation are
never goingto be obvious or settled. The regulationof anydisruptive new
technology is always going to be reactive and based on an uncertain and
politicizedfactualbasis.
We need to be careful not to overstate the newness of this issue. To
some degree, these kind of difficulties have always been around, at least
since the rise of industrial capitalism and the acceleration in technological
advancementthatitfacilitated.51
48. Gregory N. Mandel, Emerging Technology Governance, in INNOVATIVE
GOVERNANCEMODELSFOREMERGINGTECHNOLOGIES44,62(GaryE.Marchantet.al.
eds., 2013) (“Given the uncertainty surrounding an emerging technology’s
development and risks, there will be inherent limitations concerning how specific a
frameworkcanbedevelopedatearlystages.”).
49. Press Conference, Donald Rumsfeld, U.S. Sec’yof Def., NATO HQ, Brussels
(June 6, 2002), http://www.nato.int/docu/speech/2002/s020606g.htm (“The message is
thatthereareno“knowns.” Therearethingweknowthatweknow. Thereareknown
unknowns. Thatistosaytherearethingsthatwenowknowwedon’tknow. Butthere
are also unknown unknowns. There are things we don’t know we don’t know. So
whenwedothebestwecanandwepullallthisinformationtogether,andwethensay
wellthat’sbasicallywhatweseeasthesituation,thatisreallyonlytheknownknowns
and theknownunknowns. And each year, wediscoverafewmoreof thoseunknown
unknowns.”).
50. See Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, 48
WAKEFORESTL.REV.791,799(2014)[hereinafterKaal,FinancialServicesIndustry]
(“Anticipation of unknown future contingencies and thepreemption of possiblefuture
crises do not play a significant role in the current regulatory framework or in the
literatureonfinancialregulation.”).
51. Schumpeterdescribedasearlyasthe1940sthe“gaelsofcreativedestruction,”
often unleashed by technology, that periodically sweep through industries and sink
weak and outdated firms. JOSEPH A. SCHUMPETER, CAPITALISM, SOCIALISM, AND
DEMOCRACY 83–84 (3d ed. 1962) (“The opening up of new markets, foreign or
domestic, and the organizational development from the craft shop and factoryto such
concerns as U.S. Steel illustrate the process of industrial mutation that incessantly
revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantlydestroying the old one,
incessantly creating a new one. This process of Creative Destruction is the essential
fact about capitalism. It is what capitalism consists in and what every capitalist
concern has got to live in ... Every piece of business strategy acquires its true
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 575
An obvious solution to this regulatory dilemma might be to adopt some
form of policy experimentation, i.e., testing different regulatory schemes
and then comparing the results.52 But such experimentation poses a
problemforregulators.53 Toooften,regulatorsdefine“success”innegative
terms, as in the avoidance of catastrophe.54 Avoiding grounds for criticism
inevitably results in an overly cautious approach, called the “precautionary
principle.”55
From the perspective of entrepreneurs and consumers, such caution can
be a “disaster” or at least less preferable.56 The result is that, all too often,
there is a disconnect between regulation and commercial and consumer
accesstothatinnovation.57
significance only against the background of that process and within the situation
createdbyit. Itmustbeseeninitsroleintheperennialgaleofcreativedestruction;it
cannot be understood irrespective of it or, in fact, on the hypothesis that there is a
perennial lull.”); see also John Komlos, Has Creative Destruction Become More
Destructive? (Nat’l Bureau Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 20379, 2014),
(suggesting that the creative destruction aspect of capitalism is being amplified,
especiallyinlabormarkets,bytheexponentialpaceoftechnology).
52. Wulf Kaal, What Happens When Technology Is Faster Than the Law?, CLS
BLUESKYBLOG(Sept.22,2016),http://clsbluesky.law.columbia.edu/2016/09/22/what-
happens-when-technology-is-faster-than-the-law/.
53. Id.
54. See Noah M. Sachs, Rescuing the Strong Precautionary Principle from Its
Critics, 2011 U.ILL.L.REV. 1285, 1298 (2011) (“One defining feature of the Strong
Precautionary Principle is that it places a governmental entity in a role as a risk
gatekeeper. ImplicitinthePrincipleistheideathattheremustbea‘decider’whowill
determinewhethertheproponent of theactivityhas met its burden ofproof on safety.
The preventive thrust of Strong Precaution further implies that this review of risks
shouldoccurbeforetheactivitycommencesorthepotentiallyriskyproductreachesthe
market.”).
55. The “precautionary principle” is a term used prominently by the UN on
declaring regulatory policy on environmental issues. See, e.g., United Nations
ConferenceonEnvironmentandDevelopment,RiodeJaniero,Braz.,June3–14,1992,
The Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, U.N. Doc. A/CONF.151/5/
Rev.1 (June 13, 1992), reprinted in 31 I.L.M. 874, 879 (1992) (showing the UN’s
prominent use of the precautionary principle when declaring regulatory policy on
environmental issues); see also Robert W. Kahn & Cass R. Sunstein, The
Precautionary Principle as a Basis for Decision Making, 2 ECONOMISTS’VOICE,1, 1
(2005)(“Wearguethattheprecautionaryprincipledoesnothelpindividualsornations
make difficult choices in a non–arbitrary way. Taken seriously, it can be paralyzing,
providing no direction at all.”); John D. Graham, The Perils of the Precautionary
Principle: Lessons from the American and European Experience, HERITAGEFOUND.:
HERITAGE LECTURES (Jan. 15, 2004), http://www.heritage.org/research/lecture/the-per
ils-of-the-precautionary-principle-lessons-from-the-american-and-european-experience.
56. Kaal,supranote52.
57. Id.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

576 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
A. FactsToday
Inspite ofthese problems,a fact–basedapproachtoregulation mayhave
worked relatively well in the past when innovation cycles were longer and
the pace of disruptive innovation occurred over decades.58 Regulators had
the necessary time to get their facts in order before making a regulatory
intervention.59
In this respect, it is again instructive to consider the origins of the
modern automobile industry. Karl Benz was awarded a patent for the
internal combustion engine in 1879, and started producing automobiles in
the mid–1880s.60 However, Benz’s engine did not disrupt the horse and
carriage industry or bring the automobile into the mainstream of everyday
life. This only occurred much later, in 1908, when Henry Ford started to
massproducetheModelT.61
The slower pace of technological disruption explains why, until
relatively recently, the public was happy to delegate regulatory decisions
about new technology to policy makers relying on the scientific advice of
58. Vermeulen, supra note 2; Rick Rieder, Tech Adoption Rates Have Reached
Dizzying Heights, MKT. REALIST (Dec. 24, 2015, 9:32 AM), http://marketrealist.
com/2015/12/adoption-rates-dizzying-heights/; Rita Gunther McGrath, The Pace of
Technology Adoption Is Speeding Up, HARV. BUS. REV. (Nov. 25, 2013), https://
hbr.org/2013/11/the-pace-of-technology-adoption-is-speeding-up.
59. See ALLENBY, supra note 26, at 10 (“But it is not just that each NBRIC
technology system is powerful; it is that they are combining in unexpected ways that
are both beyond any single technological domain, and very potent.”); Steven W.
Popper, Technological Change and the Challenges for 21st Century Governance,
AAAS SCI. AND TECH. POL’Y Y.B. 83, 86 (2003) (“We see a growing divergence
between time cycles of government and those of technology development. Quite
simply,thispresentsgovernmentoperationswithaHobson’schoice: Eitherlivewithin
a shorter response time and run the concomitant risk of ill–considered actions (or
inactions) or see government input become less relevant and assume reduced stature.
Theriskofinsufficientaccesstoinformationislarge. Thisgoesbeyondtheproblemof
gaining awareness of and collating relevant data series. A related and in many ways
more problematic issue is that of managing and accounting for data and other
knowledge resources. There is then, of course, the central task of analyzing and
providing an interpretation of the data. These issues are already of concern and will
increaseintime.”).
60. JOHNCOAD,FINDINGANDUSINGOIL48(2008)(“Hereceivedhisfirstpatentin
1879, and founded Benz & Company to produce industrial engines in Germany. He
began designing a ‘motor carriage.’ Benz designed his three–wheel carriage engine
with an electric ignition, differential gears and water cooling. It was first driven in
Mannheim in 1885. On January 29, 1886, he was granted a patent for his gasoline–
fuelledautomobile.”).
61. ALANAXELROD&CHARLESPHILLIPS,WHATEVERYAMERICANSHOULDKNOW
ABOUTAMERICANHISTORY: 225EVENTSTHATSHAPEDTHENATION210(3ded.2008)
(“Thecompanywas profitablefromthestart butbecomeeven moreso in 1908, when
Ford introduced the Model T. Up to this point, all manufacturers, including Ford
himself,hadseentheautomobileasacustom–madeluxuryitemforthewealthy.”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 577
experts.62 Although the public once had a relatively high degree of trust in
both the political process and the scientific/expert method, consistent
empirical evidence demonstrates that both trust in government and experts
hasdeclinedinrecentyears.63
In today’s world,the incessant speed of technologicalchange means that
this kind of approach faces insurmountable challenges. The pressure of
time means that the facts surrounding a piece of new technology or other
innovation may not be there, or the regulators may simply select the
“wrong”—oratleastcontestedorotherwiseirrelevant—factsasthebasis
of regulation. The lackof time means that establishing facts or negotiating
withentrenchedinterestsbecomesmuchmoredifficult.64
62. RebeccaM.Bratspies,RegulatoryTrust,51ARIZ.L.REV.575,576–77(2009)
(“Beck explains that unceasing technological innovation significantly contributes to
riskanduncertaintyinmodernindustrialsocietybyforcingaconstantreassessmentof
the relationships between scientific knowledge, technology, and public policy. In
particular, new technologies underscore a growing divergence between market
incentives and social welfare. As a society, we often turn to regulation to bridge that
gap. But, in contexts as diverse as the licensing of agricultural biotechnology, the
approvalofnewdrugsoroversightofnewfinancialinstruments,thesamerefrainplays
over and over — regulators must make high–stakes regulatory choices that implicate
poorlyunderstoodrisks.”).
63. See Cary Funk & Lee Rainie, Public and Scientists’ Views on Science and
Society,PEWRES.CTR.,(Jan.29.2015),http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/29/public
-and-scientists-views-on-science-and-society/ (“Despite broadly similar views about
theoverallplaceofscienceinAmerica,citizensandscientistsoftenseescience-related
issuesthroughdifferentsetsofeyes. Therearelargedifferencesintheirviewsacrossa
hostofissues.”);BeyondDistrust: HowAmericansViewTheirGovernment,PEWRES.
CTR.,(Nov.23,2015),http://www.people-press.org/2015/11/23/1-trust-in-government-
1958-2015/(“Theerosionofpublictrustingovernmentbeganinthe1960s.Theshare
saying they could trust the federal government to do the right thing nearly always or
mostofthetimereachedanall–timehighof77%in1964. Withinadecade—aperiod
that included the Vietnam War, civil unrest and the Watergate scandal — trust had
fallen by more than half, to 36%. By the end of the 1970s, only about a quarter of
Americansfeltthattheycouldtrustthegovernmentatleastmostofthetime....Amid
the war in Iraq and economic uncertainty at home, trust in government continued to
decline. ByJuly2007, trusthad fallento24%. Sincethen, thesharesayingtheycan
trust thefederal government has generallyfluctuated in anarrow range, between 20%
and25%.”);seealsoBratspies,supranote62,at577(“Trustworthyregulatorshavethe
potential to enhance society’s overall resilience, but uncertainty erodes the public’s
trust and alienates citizens from the regulatory institutions intended to serve them.
Declininglevelsoftrustingovernmentinstitutionsbothdocumentandreflectthisgrim
reality. Loss of trust undermines regulatory effectiveness and diminishes society’s
overall capacity to persevere and even thrive in the face of multiple, unpredictable
risks.”).
64. Vermeulen, supra note 2; Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation via Investment
Data as a Remedy for Law’s Diminishing Capacity to React to Innovation, OXFORD
BUS.L.BLOG(Sept. 18,2016),https://www.law.ox.ac.uk/business-law-blog/blog/2016
/09/dynamic-regulation-investment-data-remedy-law%E2%80%99s-diminishing-
capacity;Kaal,Innovation,supranote4.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

578 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
Moreover, there is a much greater degree of skepticism about the policy
makers andscientists. Most people maynot be familiar withterms suchas
“agencycapture”or “minoritarianbias,”65but theyare acutelyaware ofthe
way that political and scientific processes have been distorted by vested
interestsandlobbyingonthepartofwell–organizedinterestgroups.66
Take Airbnb, for example. Regulators in some countries have become
concerned that individuals looking to get rich from renting out properties
via Airbnb are buying housing in desirable urban residential areas, thus
distorting property prices and — potentially — creating housing shortages
insuchareas.67
65. SeeNeilK.Komesar,AJobfortheJudges: TheJudiciaryandtheConstitution
in a Massive and Complex Society, 86 MICH.L.REV. 657, 671 (1988) (“Minoritarian
biassupposesaninordinatepowerofthefewattheexpenseofthemany. Thepowerof
these few stems from better access to the seats of power through personal influence,
organization,information,orsophistication. Inoursociety,influencecanbegainedby
identifyingimportantpoliticalfiguresanddeliveringwhatthosepoliticalfigureswant.
The terms of trade may be as crass as graft or as innocent as information.”); Neal D.
Fortin, TheHang–Upwith HACCP: TheResistanceto TranslatingScienceinto Food
Safety Law, 58 FOOD & DRUG L.J. 565, 582 (2003) (“Agency capture has been
described as the occasion when a regulated firm wins ‘the hearts and minds of the
regulators.’ Capture in this instance, however, is not an all–or–nothing phenomenon,
butamatterofdegrees. Inthesubtlestsense,captureexistsanytimeanagencymoves
too far toward accommodating a single interest while moving away from its statutory
mission.”).
66. SeeJohnC.Coffee,Jr.,ThePoliticalEconomyofDodd–Frank: WhyFinancial
Reform Tends to Be Frustrated and Systemic Risk Perpetuated, 97 CORNELLL. REV.
1019, 1036 (2012) (“The alternative view, here presented, agrees that crisis is a
precipitant, allowinglegislative inertiato beovercome. After acrisis, Congress tends
toadoptproposalslong–favoredbytherelevantadministrativeagencybutfrustratedby
powerfullobbies. Onlywithacrisiscanreformers—or‘politicalentrepreneurs’inthe
political science vernacular — aggregate sufficient support to pass reform legislation.
For example, in the years prior to the Enron and WorldCom crisis in 2001 and 2002,
SEC Chairman Arthur Levitt sought to respond to a soaring number of financial
statement restatements and campaigned to restrict auditor conflicts of interest. Levitt
was rebuffed, however, bythe industry. With the Enron and WorldCom insolvencies
and the evidence of financial impropriety manifest to all, Levitt and others — most
notably, Senator Paul Sarbanes — convinced Congress to replace auditor self–
regulation with a new body: the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(PCAOB).”);RobertaRomano,RegulatingintheDark4(YaleLawSch.JohnM.Olin
Ctr. for Studies in Law, Econ., and Pub. Pol’y, Research Paper No. 442, 2011),
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1974148 (“A typical pattern in a
financialcrisisisamediaclamorforaction,reflecting,ifnotspurring,asimilarpopular
demand, and as a crisis intensifies, an accompanying suggestion that government
inactionisprolongingthepainandsuffering. Ariskaverselegislator,whoseobjective
isreelection,will,nodoubt,concludethatthereisaneedtorespondwithoutseekingto
ascertain, if it were even possible, whether such demands are media–driven, or
popularlyshared,or,infact,necessarytoresolvetheproblem.”).
67. See Tim Logan et al., Airbnb and Other Short–Term Rentals Worsen Housing
Shortage, Critics Say, L.A. TIMES (Mar. 11, 2015, 3:00 AM), http://www.latimes
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 579
The solution? A rule that requires those renting accommodation via
Airbnbtobeactuallylivinginthepropertywhenitisbeingused.68
Of course, the selection of the “relevant facts” in this case and the
resulting rule benefits certain vested interests, most obviously the hotel
industrywhostandtoloseoutfromthenewcompetitionfromAirbnb.69
But are the selected facts in this case relevant or even correct? A
possible effect of a rule requiring residency of rented accommodation is
that it may limit Airbnb in certain markets, so it is clearly important to get
thisright.70
ArethepeopleintendingtoofferAirbnbaccommodationreallyonlyinit
for the money? In many cases, renting accommodation may be about
connecting with people from other cultures or offering a welcoming
experiencefortouristsvisitinganewcity.71
The “factual” premise or basis of the regulation — i.e., individuals
looking to make easy money from residential properties — may simply be
.com/business/realestate/la-fi-airbnb-housing-market-20150311-story.html (“A study
rel eased Wednesdayfrom LosAngeles AllianceforaNew Economy, alabor–backed
advocacygroup,estimatesthatmorethan7,000housesandapartmentshavebeentaken
offtherentalmarketinmetroLosAngelesforuseasshort-termrentals.”);seealsoBiz
Carson, TheFightBetween Airbnb and San Francisco Just Got Nastier, BUS.INSIDER
(May15,2015,9:00PM),http://www.businessinsider.com/san-francisco-report-blames
-airbnb-for-housing-shortage-airbnb-strikes-back-2015-5 (“On Monday, the Board of
Supervisors Land Use and Transportation Committee will vote on how to amend the
regulation. Oneproposal fromthe Mayor’s office puts the cap at 120 days a year for
short term rentals. Another option set forward by Supervisor David Campos was to
limit short term rentals to a max of 60 days a year and compels Airbnb to release its
datatothecity.”).
68. See, e.g., Will Coldwell, Airbnb’s Legal Troubles: What are the Issues?,
GUARDIAN (July 8, 2014), https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/08/airbnb-leg
al-troubles-what-are-the-issues (“For example, in New York owners or tenants cannot
legally rent their apartments out for short periods (less than 30 days) unless they are
alsolivingintheproperty.”).
69. Vermeulen, supra note 2; Ahmed Mahmoud, The Impact of Airbnb on Hotel
and Hospitality Industry, HOSPITALITYNET (Mar. 7, 2016), http://www.hospitalitynet.
org/news/4074708.html (noting that HVS Consulting & Valuation “estimated that
hotelsloseapproximately$450millionindirectrevenuesperyeartoAirbnb. Between
September2014andAugust2015,480,000hotelroomnightswerereservedwhileover
2.8millionroomnightswerebookedonAirbnb. By2018,HVSestimatesthatAirbnb
roomnightswillreach5millionperyear”).
70. Vermeulen, supra note 2; Gideon Yaffe, Op-Ed, Activists Say Airbnb Drives
Up Rents. But Is That Actually True? L.A. Needs to Find Out, L.A. TIMES (May13,
2016, 5:00 AM), http://www.latimes.com/opinion/op-ed/la-oe-0513-yaffe-airbnb-ordi
nance-la-20160513-story.html.
71. Vermeulen, supra note 2; Airi Lampinen & Coye Cheshire, Hosting via
Airbnb: Motivations and Financial Assurances in Monetized Network Hospitality, in
PROCEEDINGS OF THE 2016 CHI CONFERENCE ON HUMAN FACTORS IN COMPUTING
SYSTEMS1669(2016).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

580 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
incorrect. The selected facts may not even be facts, or at least, the most
relevantfactsaboutaparticularinnovation.72
As a second example, consider Uber or similar “taxi–like” car sharing
services. There is no doubt that services like Uber are disrupting the taxi
industry.73 The effect is that regulatory debates around Uber are currently
dominatedbyanunfaircompetitionargument:
“Trustworthy and reliable taxi companies are facing unfair competition
from Uber and this kind of unlicensed activity poses enormous risks for
consumers.”74
“US startup companies, in particular, don’t respect the legal order that
protectstheEuropeanlabormarket.”75
72. Vermeulen, supra note 2; Proposed MA House Bill #2816 and Your Airbnb,
MYURB.BNB (June 18, 2015), http://myurbanbnb.com/proposed-ma-house-bill-2816-
and-your-airbnb/(notingthat“manyusethisincometohelppayoffmortgages,college
tuition, fix up their property or to supplement their earnings due to retirement,
unemploymentoranunexpectedoccurrence”).
73. SeeMeganGarber,AfterUber,SanFranciscoHasSeena65%DeclineinCab
Use, ATLANTIC (Sept. 17, 2014), http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/
09/what-uber-is-doing-to-cabs-in-san-francisco-in-1-crazy-chart/380378/ (“The news
was . . . not good, for San Francisco’s taxi industry, anyway. The precipitous rise of
serviceslikeUber(anditsfellowshared–rideservices,likeLyftandSidecar)hasmeant
— markets being what theyare — a precipitous decline in taxi rides taken across the
city. TheSFMTA’sinterimdirectorKateToranreportedtoherboardthattheaverage
trips per taxicab in the city had declined from 1,424 a month in March 2012 to only
504asofJuly2014.”);seealsoBrishenRogers,TheSocialCostsofUber,82U.CHIL.
REV.DIALOGUE85,86(2015)(“Uberissparkingtwomajortransformationsofthecar–
hire sector. First, it is eliminating various transaction costs that have plagued the
sector, particularly search costs, thereby creating something akin to a free market for
car–hire services. Second, it is encouraging vertical and horizontal integration of the
sector,whichishighlyfragmentedinmanycities.”).
74. Vermeulen, supra note 2; see, e.g., Dean Baker, Don’t Buy the ‘Sharing
Economy’Hype: AirbnbandUberareFacilitatingRip–Offs,GUARDIAN,https://www.
theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/27/airbnb-uber-taxes-regulation (last mod-
ified July 14, 2017) (“Insofar as Airbnb is allowing people to evade taxes and
regulations, the companyis not a net plus to the economyand society— it is simply
facilitating a bunch of rip–offs. Others in the economy will lose by bearing an
additional tax burden or being forced to live next to an apartment unit with a never–
ending paradeof noisyvisitors, just to cite two examples. The same storymayapply
withUber. Uberiscurrentlyindisputeswithregulatorsoverwhetheritscarsmeetthe
safety and insurance requirements imposed on standard taxis. Also, many cities
impose some restrictions on the number of cabs in the hopes of ensuring a minimum
level of earnings for drivers, but if Uber and related services (like Lyft) flood the
market,theycouldharmalldrivers’abilitytoearnevenminimumwage.”).
75. Id.; seealso Evan Rudowski,Uber, Uber Alles?Notin Europe, TECHCRUNCH
(Feb. 17, 2016), https://techcrunch.com/2016/02/17/uber-uber-alles-not-in-europe/
(“Germans lovespeed,buttheydon’t loverecklessness: thereasononecandrivefast
ontheautobahnisbecauseonecanbeconfidentthatotherdriverswillfollowtherules
of the road. American companies, by contrast, are accustomed to a culture built on
rejecting rules and deregulation has been gospel to the American political and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 581
These “facts” are then used to justify regulatory intervention that
effectivelyattemptstokillUberincertainmarkets.
But,aswiththeAirbnbcase,arethesefactsreallyfacts? Or,atleast,are
they the most relevant facts? Do taxis really offer a better service than
Uber? Is Uber any less safe than a licensed taxi? And is a lack of respect
forlaborlawsapertinentfactormotivatingcompanieslikeAirbnb?
The two–way rating system (drivers rate customers and customers rate
drivers) and an algorithm–based system for matching up drivers and
customers appear to offer an effective means of policing Uber drivers and
ensuring a safe ride for customers.76 And is most people’s experience of
licensedtaxisreallysogreat,atleastwhencomparedwithUber?
Most consumers just want a quick, clean and respectful service, but —
all too often — incumbent taxi companies offer a disrespectful or
unreliable driver and a dirty cab. There is a disconnect between the facts
that regulators identify as important andthe experience and wishes of most
consumers.
None of this is to necessarily blame the regulators. Agency capture, in
which entrenched interests distort regulatory decisions, has always posed
somerisk,77buttheaccelerationininnovationcyclesmeansthateveninthe
best conditions and with the best of intentions, selecting relevant facts is a
difficult task. And the option of simply waiting seems likely to result in
furthercomplicationsandcriticism.
In an age of constant, complex and disruptive technological innovation,
economic mainstream since the 80s . . . . In European markets, succeeding within the
rules is a badge of honor. Breaking the rules, even in pursuit of a seemingly worthy
goalsuchasimprovingmarketefficiencyorconsumerchoice,canbeseenasoffensive
andnotsomethingtonecessarilybeapplauded.”);ShouldUberBeAllowedtoCompete
in Europe and if so How?, COMPETITION POL’Y INT’L (Jun. 18, 2015), https://www
.competitionpolicyinternational.com/should-uber-be-allowed-to-compete-in-europe-
and-if-so-how/ (“Uber’s arrival in Europe has generated massive demonstrations by
taxidriversandanumberofcourtjudgmentsbanningorrestrictingUber’sserviceson
thegroundthatthecompanyengaged in ‘unfaircompetition.’ Uberandotheronline–
enabled car transportation services to connect passengers with drivers offer an
attractive alternative to regular taxi services. The difficulty is that these services are
protectedbyregulatorymeasuresthatcreatesignificantbarrierstoentry.”).
76. See How Uber Ratings Work | 5-Star Tips, UBER, http://ubermovement.
com/ratings-are-a-two-way-street/ (last visited Sept. 8, 2016) (“Providing two–way
ratingsandfeedbackallowustocelebratetheridersanddriverswhomakeUbergreat.
This system also lets us know if the qualityof service provided is consistentlybelow
Uber’sstandards.”).
77. SeeThomasO.McGarity,MTBE: APrecautionaryTale,28HARV.ENVTL.L.
Rev. 281, 325-26 (2004) (explaining that conflicts of interests arise within regulatory
agencies when the agency only receives feedback on the effectiveness of regulations
from regulatees and lead to the agency’s regulations reflecting the economic needs of
theregulateratherthanthepublicinterest).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

582 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
knowing what, when, and how to structure regulatory interventions has
become much more difficult.78 Regulators can find themselves in a
situation where they believe they must opt for either reckless action
(regulation without sufficient facts) or paralysis (doing nothing). Inevitably
in such a case, caution tends to trump risk. The precautionary principle
becomes the default position.79 But such caution merely functions to
reinforce the status quo and the result is that new technologies struggle to
reachthemarketinatimelyorefficientmanner.
B. A“Post–FactSociety”?
Should we conclude from the above analysis of the contemporary
regulatory dilemma that we live in a “post–fact society?” A “post–fact
society” means that facts no longer matter or that they can be reduced to
themereexpressionofpoliticalinterests.80
78. See Kaal, Innovation, supra note 4, at 5–6 (identifying the “pacing problem”
faced by regulatory agencies; technological developments are occurring at an
acceleratingrate,whilestateandfederalagenciesarerespondingtothesedevelopments
and a decelerating rate); Gary E. Marchant, The Growing Gap Between Emerging
TechnologiesandtheLaw,inTHEGROWINGGAPBETWEENEMERGINGTECHNOLOGIES
ANDLEGAL–ETHICALOVERSIGHT: THEPACINGPROBLEM,21–23(GaryE.Marchantet
al. eds., 2011) (identifying two causes of the pacing problem; first, legal frameworks
are based on a static rather than dynamic view of technology and, second, regulatory
institutions are slowing down with respect to their capacity to adjust to changing
technologies); Moses, supra note 40, at 764 (explaining that the pacing problem is
particularly evident in nanotechnology, biotechnology, robotics, information and
communications technologies, and applied cognitive science); Lyria Bennett Moses,
HowtoThinkAboutLaw,RegulationandTechnology:Problemswith‘Technology’as
a Regulatory Target, 5 L. INNOVATION & TECH. 1, 7 (2013) (presenting different
methodsforapproachingthepacingproblem).
79. See Cass R. Sunstein, Throwing Precaution to the Wind: Why the ‘Safe’
Choice Can Be Dangerous, BOS. GLOBE (July 13, 2008), http://archive.boston.
com/bostonglobe/ideas/articles/2008/07/13/throwing_precaution_to_the_wind/ (“[t]he
precautionaryprinciple,forallitsrhetoricalappeal,isdeeplyincoherent.Itisofcourse
true that we should take precautions against some speculative dangers. But there are
always risks on both sides of a decision;inaction can bring danger, but so can action.
Precautions, in other words, themselves create risks—and hence the principle bans
what it simultaneouslyrequires.”); Jonathan Adler, The Problems with Precaution: A
Principle without Principle, AEI (May 25, 2011), http://www.aei.org/publication/the-
problems-with-precaution-a-principle-without-principle/ (analyzing the tendency of
regulators to identify the risks of new technology without regard for the risks of
existingtechnology).
80. See e.g., Michiko Kakutani, Texts Without Context, N.Y. TIMES (Mar. 17,
2010), http://www.nytimes.com/2010/03/21/books/21mash.html?_r=0 (“As Mr. Man-
joo observes in ‘True Enough: Learning to Live in a Post–Fact Society’ (2008), the
wayinwhich‘informationnowmovesthroughsociety—oncurrentsoflooselylinked
online groups and niche media outlets, pushed along by experts and journalists of
dubious character and bolstered by documents that are no longer considered proof of
reality’ — has fostered deception and propaganda and also created what he calls a
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 583
Much of the current discussion on this issue seems to go in this kind of
direction.81 The stalemate resulting from competing claims to scientific
authority has damaged — possibly even destroyed — trust in the capacity
ofsciencetoprovidedefinitiveorindisputableknowledgethatcanformthe
basis of regulation.82 And a similar skepticism surrounds politicians and
their abilityto exercise independentjudgment, fuelingthe riseof a populist
styleof“anti–politics”inmanycountries.83
Accordingtothistypeofskepticalaccount,weareleftwithapluralityof
competingnarrativesandnocriteriawithwhichtomakereliablejudgments
about which facts are “true.”84 We inhabit a world of theatrics and instant
messaging, where truth and facts are reduced to a game — albeit a very
seriousone—ofimagemanagementandarhetoricofpersuasion.85
The problem with this view is that it reinforces the type of regulatory
‘Rashomonworld’where‘theveryideaofobjectiverealityisunderattack.’ Politicians
and voters on theright and leftnot onlyhold different opinions fromoneanother, but
oftencan’tevenagreeoverasharedsetoffacts,asclashesoverclimatechange,health
careandtheIraqwarattest.”).
81. See William Davies, The Age of Post–Truth Politics, N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 24,
2016), http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/24/opinion/campaign-stops/the-age-of-post-tr
uth-politics.html (questioning whether facts can still be called “‘facts’ when they no
longerprovideuswitharealitythatweallagreeon?”).
82. Id.(“Theproblemistheoversupplyoffactsinthe21stcentury: Therearetoo
manysources,toomanymethods,withvaryinglevelsofcredibility,dependingonwho
funded a given study and how the eye–catching number was selected . . . . Like
statisticsorothertraditionalfacts,thisdataisquantitativeinnature.What’snewisboth
its unprecedented volume (the “big” in big data) and also the fact that it is being
constantly collected by default, rather than by deliberate expert design. Numbers are
being generated much faster than we have any specific use for. But they can
nevertheless be mined to get a sense of how people are behaving and what they are
thinking.”)
83. Seee.g., Gerald F. Seib, Behind theRiseof Populism, EconomicAngst, WALL
ST. J., (Jan. 20, 2016), http://www.wsj.com/articles/behind-the-rise-of-populism-econ
omic-angst-1453199402 (reporting on the increasing public mistrust of formerly
authoritative figures to represent reality accurately); Trust in Government, GALLUP,
http://www.gallup.com/poll/5392/trust-government.aspx (last visited Sept 8, 2016) (A
record 81% of Americans reported in 2015 to have onlyhave some or no trust in the
government in Washington to do what is right); Coffee, supra note 66, at 1078–79
(detailing the tendency for those mistrustful of government to blame economic
downturnsonoverregulationdespitemountainousevidencetothecontrary).
84. See, e.g., Katherine Viner, How Technology Disrupted the Truth, GUARDIAN
(July 12, 2016), https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-dis
rupted-the-truth;Davies,supranote81.
85. See Davies, supra note 81 (“As politics becomes more adversarial and
dominated by television performances, the status of facts in public debate rises too
high. We place expectations on statistics and expert testimony that strains them to
breaking point. Rather than sit coolly outside the fray of political argument, facts are
nowoneofthemainrhetoricalweaponswithinit.”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

584 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
paralysis highlighted above. If we live in a post–truthworldthen we don’t
have any objective basis on which to act, leading to inertia or the
reproductionofthestatusquo.
Andyet,ratherthanabandoningfacts,weshouldbethinkingaboutsome
alternative grounds for regulation that would allow the regulation of
innovativeproductsandservicestobemoreeffectiveandlegitimate.
After all, many consumers want instant drone delivery and many
entrepreneurs are willing to provide such a service.86 Moreover, those
marketsthatare“firstmovers”standtogainthefinancialandotherbenefits
that offering such a service promises. In a global society in which
regulatory competition is the “new normal,”87 regulators can pay a heavy
economic price for being overly cautious or abandoning the project of
tryingtoestablishameaningfulbasisforregulation.88
IV. THREEPRINCIPLESFORREGULATIONTOMORROW
Lawmaking and regulatory design needs to become more proactive,
dynamic and responsive.89 So how can regulators actually achieve these
goals? What can they do to promote innovation and offer better
86. See Teresa Hayes, The Rising Demand for Drones in the Retail Sector,
MKT.RES.COM(June29,2016),http://blog.marketresearch.com/the-demand-for-drones-
in-the-retail-sector (“Interest in drones from the retail sector is growing rapidly as
competitivepressurespushretailersanddistributorstodevelopnewwaystomaketheir
supply chains more efficient, to automate warehouses, and to reduce delivery costs.
Walmart, the nation’s largest retailer, recently announced plans to use drones for
inventory management in its warehouses. Amazon, the nation’s largest internet
retailer, is researching the use of drones to deliver packages to consumers. Global e–
commercegiantAlibabaistestingdeliverydronesinChinawhileDHLisalreadyusing
dronestodeliverpackagesinGermany.”).
87. See Ehud Kamar, Beyond Competition for Incorporations, 94 GEO.L.J. 1725,
1725 (2006) (“This [a]rticle documents and analyzes a powerful form of regulatory
competition—competition for investments—that has been transforming national
corporate laws in the European Union in recent years. Unlike the competition for
incorporations, competition for investments shapes corporate law when firms cannot
easily incorporate outside the jurisdiction in which they operate . . . . High political
payoffsawaitsuccessfulparticipantsinthecompetitionforinvestments,whichenables
enablethemtoovercomeoppositionthatcanstiflecompetitionforincorporations.”).
88. Seeid.
89. See Kaal, Innovation, supra note 4, at 14–20; Kaal, Financial Services
Industry, supra note 50, at 818–20 (noting financial rulemaking with dynamic
elements); Wulf A. Kaal, Evolution of Law: Dynamic Regulation in a New
InstitutionalEconomicsFramework1,1–4(Univ.ofSt.Thomas(Minn.)LegalStudies
Research Paper No. 13-17, 2013), http://ssrn.com/abstract=2267560 [hereinafter Kaal,
EvolutionofLaw];WulfA.Kaal&ErikP.M.Vermeulen,HowtoRegulateDisruptive
Innovation — From Facts to Data 2, 17 (Univ. of St. Thomas (Minn.) Legal Studies
Research Paper No. 16–13, 2016), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id
=2808044[hereinafterKaal&Vermeulen,DisruptiveInnovation].
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 585
opportunities to people wanting to build a new business around disruptive
technologyorsimplyenjoythebenefitsofadisruptivenewtechnologyasa
consumer?
Here arethree principlesthat we believe canformthebasis ofregulation
tomorrow:
A. DataDrivenRegulatoryIntervention
Relying on different sources of data surrounding new technologies can
provide some signals or clues about what, when and, to a certain extent,
howtoregulate.
Of particular importance in this context, is data relating to investment in
new technology and innovation.90 Such data can be used as an index or
proxyofthenecessityofregulation.91
Collecting and collating such data may appear to be a tedious task for
policy makers, regulators, lawmakers and alike. However, since
government funding is often considered to be the main driver behind
disruptive innovations, a plethora of investment data is readily available to
make accurate predictions regarding what the next “big thing” is likely to
be.92
Moreover, the fact start–up companies usually challenge existing rules,
laws, and regulations means that private data sources are widely
available.93 The proliferation of the better hand–collected global databases
onthemarket,suchasCBInsights,PitchBookandMattermark,94canmake
animportantcontributiontoa“data–driven”regulatoryapproach.95
Figure 1 gives an indication of what such a data–set might look like.
The Figure shows the global venture capital investment deals per industry
90. See Kaal & Vermeulen, Disruptive Innovation, supra note 89, at 7–8 (“We
applyadata–drivenapproachthatenablesdynamicregulationasestablishedbyKaalto
regulatoryissuesassociatedwithdisruptiveinnovation.”).
91. Id.
92. Vermeulen,supranote2.
93. Brian Park & Erik P.M. Vermeulen, Debunking Myths in Corporate Venture
Capital: WhatWorks,WhatDoesNot,andHowtoMakeItHappen,12J.U.S.–CHINA
PUB. ADMIN. 764, 773 (2015) (“The proliferation of global databases on the market
such as Dow Jones VentureSource, CB Insights, PitchBook, and PWC MoneyTree
contributetoimprovingtheselectionprocessforinvestorsagreatdeal.”).
94. Id.
95. Vermeulen, supra note 2. The massive amounts of data provided by these
sources, including company overviews, data on investors and investments, and on
deals, people, financials, funds, mergers and acquisitions, and various other growth
signals, such as web traffic and media mentions, provide emerging trends and early
predictive intelligence which can provide insights into the potential timing and nature
ofregulatoryactions.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

586 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
tracked by data–provider PitchBook from 2005 to the first half of 2016.
We could go much more granular than this, but even a broad perspective
clearly indicates that certain areas, such as Fintech and the Internet–of–
Things,areattractingmoreandmoreattentionfrominvestors.
In this way, investment data can help to develop a list of technologies
and issues that need to be the focus of regulatory attention. From such
data, we can get a better — and earlier — sense of which technologies are
developing and which technologies need regulatory attention. This might
thenallowregulatorstobemorepro–activeandavoidwastingresourceson
technologies that are unlikely to make it to market. It would also allow
regulators to more accurately define the scope of a technology by focusing
onthetypeoffirmthatisattractingattention.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 587
Figure1:InvestmentDataUsedforIdentifyingTechnologyTrends
As to the question of when to make a regulatory intervention, investment
data can be similarlyhelpful. When earlystage investments peak andlater
stage investments are taking off, it arguably shows demand both on the
commercial and consumer side. Data on the timing of investment appears
to provide a reliable indicator of the commercial maturity of a technology,
in the sense that high levels of investor activity indicate that a particular
technology is about to be ready for commercial exploitation.96 Figures 2
and 3 give examples in the field of “artificial intelligence” and “robotics
anddrones.”
As to the question of “how to regulate”, the starting point is that
regulationneedstobe“demanddriven,”i.e.,thesubstantialdirectionofthe
regulation needs to be based on the interests of consumers. If there is a
genuine demand for certain products or technologies, then such
technologiesshould,inprinciple,bepermitted.97
The focus on the demands of the consumers does not mean that policy
makers,lawmakersandregulatorsshouldignorethenegativesideeffectsor
other risks of new technologies. What it does mean, however, is that
entrenched interests witha clear interest in obstructinga disruptiveproduct
orserviceshouldnotbeallowedtodominatethedebate.98
Figure2:ArtificialIntelligence–VentureCapitalInvestments
96. Id.
97. Id.
98. Id.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

588 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
Figure3:RoboticsandDrones–VentureCapitalInvestments
Big Data is an example of this (see Figure 4). Clearly, the principle of
respecting privacy is important, but is not without exception and can, for
example, be overridden if there are clear diagnostic benefits in allowing
people’s private health information to be used. In this context, regulatory
experimentationstrategiesmayofferapotentialsolution.99
99. Id.; see also Michael Greenstone, Toward a Culture of Persistent Regulatory
ExperimentalandEvaluation,inNEWPERSPECTIVESONREGULATION111(DavidMoss
& Asternino eds., 2009) (noting “we cannot know a regulation’s benefits and costs
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 589
Figure4:BigData–VentureCapitalInvestments
B. APrinciple–BasedApproach
Regulators need to take the idea of regulatory competition seriously.
Most obviously, this entails a greater willingness to engage in policy and
regulatory experiments in which different regulatory regimes are adopted
andresultscompared.100 Tosomeextent,regulatorycompetitionwilloccur
“naturally,” as different jurisdictions adopt different regulatory models.101
But such experimentation is also important within a particular jurisdiction
as it provides regulators with data on the real–world effects of a particular
regulatoryschemeinacomparablesetting.
Embracing regulatory experimentation involves a re–thinking — or re–
framing — of what decision–making involves in a regulatory context.
French sociologist, Michel Callon, emphasizes how regulatory decisions
should not be thought of as “final events” (to be made for all–time and
from which we “all move on”).102 Rather, we should think of them as
“measured decision–making,” i.e., open–ended and highly contingent
untilithasbeentested”).
100. See, e.g., Christian Kirchner, Richard W. Painter & Wulf A. Kaal, Regulatory
Competition I EU CorporateLaw After Inspire Art: Unbundling Delaware’s Product
forEurope,2EUR.COMPANY&FIN.L.REV.159(2005).
101. Seeid.at167–70.
102. SeegenerallyMICHELCALLONETAL.,ACTINGINANUNCERTAINWORLD: AN
ESSAY ON TECHNICAL DEMOCRACY (Wiebe E. Bijkeyet al. eds., Graham Burchell
trans.,TheMITPress)(2009).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

590 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
choices that form one stage in a longer process.103 Regulators need to
abandonafixationonfinalityandlegalcertaintyandembrace contingency,
flexibilityandanopennesstonewideas.104
This shift in perspective also affects how we regulate disruptive
technologies. A key element of a more open approach involves a shift
fromrules to principles. Certainly,a principle–basedapproach facilitatesa
greater degree of openness and flexibility on the part of regulators, and
prevents innovative technologies (and the companies that have developed
them) from becoming bogged down in the regulatory thicket that often
resultsfromarule–focusedapproach.105
Re–framing regulation in this way and adopting a principle–based
approach facilitates action and allows future revisions in the regulatory
regime to be based on the incorporation of new knowledge or subsequent
discoveries.
In this way, the solution to the regulatory dichotomy of recklessness or
paralysis is a willingness to move beyond the expectation of finality that
surrounds regulatorydecision–making. Principle–based “contingency” can
facilitate a new flexibility, especially if it is combined with more open
communicationonthepartofregulators.
However, despite the clear benefits, companies often raise concerns
103 Nathan Young, Book Review, 35 CANADIANJ.SOC./CAHIERS 327, 328 (2010)
(reviewing MICHEL CALLON ET. AL, supra note 102) (“Rather than approaching
decisions as final events (to be made for all–time and from which we all ‘move on’),
Acting in an Uncertain World advances the alternative notion of ‘measured action’ or
measured decision–making, where ‘you do not decide [an outcome], you take
measures’ that are based on inclusive processes that involve both experts and the
public, but that ultimately remain open–ended so as to incorporate new knowledge,
discoveries,andclaims. Theneedforfinality,theauthorsargue,isusuallyoverstated,
more the product of expediency and habit than actual necessity. The antidote to the
falsedichotomyofrecklessnessversusparalysisisawillingnesstoremovetheartificial
temporal horizon that currently defines decision–making, while at the same time
creatingnew mechanisms forconsistentcitizeninvolvement intheongoingprocessof
determiningmeasuredactions.”).
104 See Kaal, Evolution of Law, supra note 89, at 1212 (“[T]he institutional
infrastructureforrulemakingwas geared towards thecreation of rulesforgoverninga
relativelystable societywith less upward mobilityand relativelystable economic and
market environments.”); see also KARLR.POPPER,THEPOVERTYOFHISTORICISM 46
(3ded.1961).
105 Kaal, Innovation, supra note 4, at 18 (“The law and technology literature
heralded principles–based regulation as another promising remedy for the pacing
problem. As contrasted with more rigid rules–based regulation, principles–based
regulation emphasizes general and abstract guiding principles for desired regulatory
outcomes....Thedownsidesofprinciples–basedregulationincludeacostlyandtime
consuming change from rules–based regulations to principles–based regulation,
uncertainty,andcomplianceproblemsbecauseofuncertainty.”)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 591
about risks related to doing business in a principle–based environment.106
The argument is that it is usuallyimpossible to complywith principles that
could change “after the fact.”107 That is to say, a principle–based approach
may facilitate policy makers, lawmakers, and regulators in promulgating
facts–based laws andrulesthrough the backdoor.108 How then can we deal
withthispotentialshortcomingofaprinciple–basedstrategy?
C. TheMinimumRegulatory“Sandbox”
The Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”), the financial regulatory
body in the United Kingdom, may offer some clues. In April 2016, the
FCA broke new ground by announcing the introduction of a “regulatory
sandbox,” which allows both startups andestablishedcompanies to roll out
and test new ideas, products, and business models in the area of Fintech
(i.e., new technologies aimed at making financial services, ranging from
onlinelendingtodigitalcurrencies,moreefficient).109 Theinvestmentdata
suggests that the UK regulator is moving in the right direction with this
kindofdecision(seeFigure5).
The idea behind the sandbox is to provide a safe space for testing
innovative products and services without being forced to comply with the
applicable set of rules and regulations.110 With the sandbox, the regulator
106. Julia Black et al., Making a Success of Principles–Based Regulation, 1 L. &
FIN. MKTS. REV. 191, 196 (2007) (“One of the criticisms usually raised against
Principles–based regimes is that theydo not givetheindustrythecomfort of knowing
whereitstandsbecausethemeaningofthePrinciplesisnotsufficientlycertain.”).
107. Kaal, Innovation, supra note 4, at 18 (“Dynamic regulatory mechanisms can
avoid the downsides of principles–based regulation. Similarities between dynamic
regulatory mechanisms and principles–based regulation include the ability to respond
to changing industry practices and the ability to improve relationships between
regulators and regulated companies. Dynamic regulation can respond to changing
industry practices through feedback effects and enhanced information for regulation.
Dynamic regulation improves the relationship between regulators and companies
throughfor–causeregulationbasedonreal–timehighqualityinformationforregulation
andassociatedfeedbackeffects.”).
108. Id.
109. See generally Christopher Woolard, FCA Dir. of Strategy and Competition,
AddressattheInnovateFinanceGlobalSummit(Apr.11,2016).
110. FCA,ForewordtoREGULATORYSANDBOX1,1(2015),(“Thispaperisareport
to Her Majesty’s Treasury on the feasibility and practicalities of developing a
regulatory sandbox that is a ‘safe space’ in which businesses can test innovative
products, services, business models and delivery mechanisms without immediately
incurring all the normal regulatory consequences of engaging in the activity in
question. We believe there is opportunityto expand Project Innovate and introduce a
regulatorysandbox. Inthisreport,wesetoutourplansforimplementingthesandbox
and proposals for how we can work with industry and the Government to further
supportbusinesses.”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

592 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
aims to foster innovation by lowering regulatory barriers and costs for
testing disruptive innovative technologies, while ensuring that consumers
willnotbenegativelyaffected.111
Figure5:FinTech–VentureCapitalInvestments
What is perhaps most interesting about the sandbox is that new ideas,
product, and services can be tested in a “live” environment.112 In order to
create this environment, the FCA defined a set of default parameters that
canbealteredonacase–by–casebasis.113 Theseparametersinclude:
Duration — as a default the FCA considers three to six months to be
appropriate.
111. See id. at 3 (noting that the three key questions that were investigated by the
FCA on the sandbox proposal were the following: regulatory barriers[(how and to
what extent can theybe lowered?], safeguards [(what safeguard should be in place to
ensure safety], and legal framework [(what regulatory arrangement are mandated by
EUlaw]).
112. See Chris Tobey, The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) Went Live With
Project Innovate in October 2014 With the Aim to Encourage Competition in the
FinanceIndustryThroughDisruptiveInnovationintheInterestofConsumers,SWORD
APAK (June 16, 2016, 15:54 PM), http://sword-apak.com/blog/posts/2016/june/the-
fca-regulatory-sandbox-is-here-to-disrupt-the-finance-industry-in-a-big-way/
(“Unauthorized firms will be given restricted authorization to test their
products/strategies in a live environment without the concerns of costs and standard
regulatoryrequirements.”).
113. FCA, supra note 110, at 3 (“The FCA sandbox unit will offer a range of
options: Firms face different regulatory challenges depending on a range of factors,
includingregulatorystatusandtypeofactivity. Wehaveidentifiedarangeofavailable
options for helping firms to address some of these challenges while testing in the
sandbox(seesection3.5andfollowing).”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

2017 REGULATIONTOMORROW 593
Customers—thenumberofcustomersshouldbebigenoughtogenerate
statistically relevant data and information. This means that customers
should be selected based on certain criteria that are appropriate for the
product and service. Clearly, pre–agreed safeguards and protections
shouldbeinplace.
Disclosure — customers should be accurately informed about the test
and available compensation (if needed). Moreover, indicators,
parameters and milestones that are used during the testing phase should
beclearsetoutfromtheoutset.
What makes the regulatory sandbox so attractive is that, insofar as
technology has consequences that flow into everyday lives, such
technology will be open to discussion and democratic supervision and
control. In this way, public entitlement to participate in regulatory debates
can help to create a renewed sense of legitimacy that justifies the
regulation.
It should come as no surprise that “regulatory sandboxes” are currently
being discussed and considered by other regulators, such as the Australian
Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC), Singapore’s Monetary
Authority(MAS)andAbuDhabi’sFinancialServicesRegulatoryAuthority
(FSRA).114
CONCLUSION
Regulators seem to understand that we have moved away from a model
in which regulatory decision–making is fact–based and delegated to
politicians and experts. In a data–based regulatory environment there is a
clear need for measures that are built on flexible and inclusive processes
that involve startups andestablished companies, regulators, experts andthe
public. This regulatory approach is already adopted in the financial
industry. It is only to be expected that this trend will expand to other areas
114. See Patrick Dwyer, Regulatory Sandboxes: ‘Safe Spaces’ for Start–Ups, FIN
TECH BUS. (June 27, 2016), http://www.fintechbusiness.com/blogs/399-regulatory-
sandboxes-safe-spaces-for-startups(“Thesesandboxeswillallowstart–upstotesttheir
services in a live environment with a reduced level of regulation, much like a clinical
trialforanewdrug. InthewordsoftheUK’sFinancialConductAuthority(FCA),the
regulatorysandboxisa‘safespace’forfintechstart-ups. Aregulatorysandboxscheme
was launched by the FCA last year. The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS),
keentopromoteSingaporeasafintechinnovationcentre,releasedaproposalpaperon
its regulatory sandbox on 6 June.”); see also Innovation Hub, AUSTL. SEC. & INV.
COMMISSION(last updated Nov. 7, 2016), http://asic.gov.au/for-business/your-business
/innovation-hub/(“Throughthehub,eligiblebusinessescanrequesttoreceiveinformal
guidancefromASIC on thelicensingprocessand keyregulatoryissues thatshouldbe
considered as you set up your business. This information is designed to help you
understand your options and, if relevant, prepare your applications for licenses or
waiversfromthelaw.”).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

594 AMERICANUNIVERSITYBUSINESSLAWREVIEW Vol.6:3
ofinnovationandtechnology.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3204119

