FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
Wulf A. Kaal*
ABSTRACT
Fair Token Launches (Fair Launch) on average outperform most
traditional digital asset projects. The comparative advantage of Fair
Launches derives largely from their ability to remedy many of the
perceived inequitable token launch practices of traditional digital
asset projects. This article helps clarify the nomenclature by
examining the commonalities of projects that use the label “Fair
Launch.” On the technology and smart contracting side, fair launch
platforms make it less likely for founders and whales to manipulate
the token market they created and provide key protections for the
token holders and community.
Key Words: Fair Token Launch, Initial Coin Offerings, Blockchain,
Distributed Ledger Technology, Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, Innovation, Entrepreneur, Start-up, Big Data, Crytpo
Economics, Diversification, Optimization, Efficiency, Governance,
Bad Actors, Risk Factors, Regulation
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
* © 2022 Wulf A. Kaal. Professor, University of Saint Thomas School of Law.
The author is grateful for outstanding research assistance from Josh Bykowski.
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................... 2
II. SHORTCOMINGS OF INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS ...................... 3
1. Core ICO Features ......................................................... 3
2. Risk Factors ..................................................................... 3
III. FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH ....................................................... 4
1. Market Performance ...................................................... 4
2. Fair Token Launches Defined .......................................... 5
a) Length of Issuance and Price Equality ........................ 5
b) Number of Wallets ..................................................... 6
c) Fairness to Public ........................................................ 6
(1) Token Distribution .................................................. 7
(2) Liquidity .................................................................. 7
(3) No Special Rules for Insiders .................................. 8
(4) Revenue Allocation to Users ................................... 8
(5) Permissible Carve-Outs ........................................... 9
(a) Start-up Expenses ............................................... 9
(b) Public Marketing Permissions ............................. 9
d) Community Governance ........................................... 10
(1) Level of Decentralization ...................................... 10
(2) No Control by Insiders .......................................... 11
3. Commonalities .............................................................. 12
IV. FAIR LAUNCH PROTOCOLS ................................................... 12
1. Liquidity Mining ............................................................ 14
2. Subscription .................................................................. 15
3. Auction ......................................................................... 16
4. Lottery .......................................................................... 16
5. Counteract Centralization of Token Supply .................. 18
V. CONCLUSION ..................................................................... 18
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
I. Introduction
During the 2018 crypto market cycle, Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs)
have provided unprecedented fundraising opportunities for startups
in digital assets. Yet, the market for ICOs was immature and used
tools and processes that created and incentivized abuses by issuers
and their affiliates, intermediaries, and other market participants.
Even in the aftermath of the ICO boom of 2017/2018, many digital
asset projects and token launches are designed with the primary
focus on benefiting the founding group, which often finds creative
ways to cash out of the project after a successful run. In 2022, many
digital asset projects and token launches still harm the public users
and token purchasers who are often, after an initial successful run,
left with less liquidity or valueless tokens. These nefarious tactics
by token issuers are not just a domain of crypto startups and their
token economies but includes traditional companies whose goal is
primarily to increase their profitability by entering the digital asset
market and issuing tokens.
As the market for token offerings continues to evolve, the token
offering process has been optimized with what has come to be
known as a “fair launch”. In a fair launch the launched token is held
entirely by the community and all founders and their affiliates are
equally part of the community. The underlying philosophy of fair
launches assumes that the market for digital assets will gravitate
towards those projects that reward the community at large the most.
Fair launch projects often assume that traditional projects that
disproportionally reward the founding group before or during a
token launch are largely inefficient, lack required transparency and
decentralization, and will therefore not prevail in a competitive
market that is subject to community pressure.
In an effort to establish which fair launch criteria distinguish fair
launch projects from traditional projects that claim adherence to fair
launch principles, this article examines core characteristics of fair
launches and associated market practices. The article establishes the
early standards for a fair launch nomenclature.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

II. Shortcomings of Initial Coin Offerings
1. Core ICO Features
In 2017/18, ICOs practices morphed often monthly and continue to
evolve. Typical ICO practices may be characterized by key
elements, including but not limited to the following:
- Publication of a whitepaper that typically functions as a
form of an offering memorandum.
- Publication of a yellowpaper that may provide technical
specifications, if any.
- A preliminary offer for the token sale that is made to a
limited group of investors
- ICO launch announcement
- PR and marketing campaign
- Official ICO launch
- Exchange or Decentralized Exchange (DEX) listing of the
token at, often, an arbitrarily determined ICO listing price
for the token.
2. Risk Factors
The ICO process illustrated above often entails significant risk
factors for the investors and the community at large. A large part of
the potential abuses that come out of the ICO process and can be
addressed by fair launches revolve around the following risk
factors:
- Security measures: No conditions and security
measures are implemented to protect the community
- Use of proceeds: Guarantees to investors pertaining to
how the proceeds from the token sale will be used by the
founders and teams to build the project in the long-term.
- Lack of community governance: most ICO project were
governed by a small group of individuals and not the
community at large or a DAO. The foundation model for
token issuance is a core form of centralized top-down
governance in the context of token offerings.
- Uncapped raises: ICOs that are accepting unlimited
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
contributions to the project during the ICO expose the
project and the investors to serious valuation issues for
the product.
- Allowing token to trade before the product is live: ICOs
that allowed their token to trade before the underlying
product was built, at least in a beta version, create significant
risk factors for the investors as the product may not go live
at all and the token may lose its value entirely.
III. Fair Token Launch
1. Market Performance
One of the main reasons Fair Launches attract attention is their
market performance. Fair Launch tokens are outperforming most
projects released via “centralized” token distribution.1 During the
digital asset market rally in late 2020 and early 2021, the collective
crypto average token launch over 90 days increased 112.41%, while
Fair Launch projects gained over 296%.2
Fair launches enable a transition of venture capitalism to altruistic
capitalism.3 In essence, if a digital asset startup can successfully
raise capital from a fair launch, the startup will be less
inclined/reliant on venture capital. As fair launches mature, they put
increasing pressure digital asset venture capital funds, similar to the
way ICOs put pressure on the venture capital industry in the 2019s.4
Fair launches could create more distance between crypto companies
and venture capitalists which forces founders to seek not just
money, but generosity, contribution, networks, capability,
community, and values.5 In the world of fair launch tokens,
founders must shift their focus towards their
users/community/stakeholders.
1 https://cointelegraph.com/news/fair-launch-tokens-outshine-the-average-coin-
s-performance
2 Id.
3 https://synthesis.substack.com/p/fair-launches-will-disrupt-crypto
4 Id.
5 Id.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

In sum, fair launch tokens are compelling for two reasons. First, the
market performance for fair launch tokens is seemingly better than
more centralized projects. Second, successful fair launches can
bypass legacy investment strategies and replace them with a
community of investors who have a stake in the project.
2. Fair Token Launches Defined
A “Fair Launch” is a term used to describe a token distribution
procedure which focuses on the fair distribution of tokens. What
constitutes fairness is mostly unclear has been subject to human
debated since the dawn of civilization. In the context of fair token
launches, however, certain foundational principles are generally
recognized by the digital asset community to fall within the
meaning of the term “fair launch.”
a) Length of Issuance and Price Equality
Key elements of fair token launches are 1. length of issuance, and
2. price equality.6 In other words, fair token launches offer equal
opportunity for market participants to acquire tokens over longer
periods of time at a comparatively equal price. A longer issuance
schedule is important for fair launch to give market participants
sufficient opportunities to evaluate the respective fair launch project
with its associate pricing. Additionally, price equality in fair launch
means that no insider group or person can purchase the token at a
significant discount.
Different token launches plotted according to their length of
issuance and equality of price.7
6https://medium.com/@arjunblj/grin-and-the-mythical-fair-launch-
395ca87a5e73
7 Id.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
b) Number of Wallets
Another definition of “fair” in the fair launch context is revolves
around the number of individuals who have access to the token or
asset at the time of launch of the project.8 To determine the fairness
of a launch for a traditional medium of exchange it is possible to
consider the number of wallets holding the token asset. Moreover,
it is possible to consider the combination of distribution of the asset
in wallets plus the active participation of the wallet owner.
c) Fairness to Public
Fair launches address the issue of uncapped token raises without a
product, at least in the beta version, that was common during the
ICO years. In a fair launch, the supply of the token, e.g. the total
number of tokens listed, and the distribution of the token supply to
the public is a key feature.
8 https://medium.com/alpineintel/on-fair-token-launches-3d500dc0576c
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

Fairness to the public in the context of fair token launches means
fairness to people who are not involved in the project, above all else.
Under this definition, a fair token launch requires that the token was
launched without a founding team, foundation, or founding dev
team. Moreover, under this definition of fair launch, no early
investors would be permitted with a pre-allocation of project tokens
or with a pre-mining program. Any forms of individual claims to a
percentage of the token supply prior to its release for the sale to the
public would be frowned upon and would not fall within the
definition of fair launch.9
The emphasis on the fairness to the public is an overarching theme
in fair token launches. For example, a fair launch requires mining,
earning, owning and governing the token through the entire
community. Nobody gains access to the token before the public sale
portion.10
Bitcoin and Dogecoin provide prominent examples of fair launches
that followed this philosophy. Bitcoin is one of the best examples
of a fair launch because there was no ICO, founders’ reward, pre-
mine, or block reward for dev teams.11
(1) Token Distribution
The token supply in a fair launch can be distributed one hundred
percent to the community. If the launch project decides to go this
route, it means that anyone who is purchasing the token competes
on the same terms and is subject to the same token sale rules.
(2) Liquidity
9 https://blog.mexo.io/glossary/fair-launch-coin-or-token/
10 https://www.finextra.com/blogposting/20638/understanding-tokenomics-the-
real-value-of-crypto
11 Louis Carter, John R. Ziegler, Ovidui Purice, Edward Lener, “The Free
Education Project: Higher Education Funding, E2 Implementation, and
Crowdsourcing Crypto Development”, City University of New York, CUNY
Academic Works, Nov. 11, 2019. see
https://academicworks.cuny.edu/bx_pubs/77/
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
The doctrine of equitable treatment of the public also requires that
the fair launch project involves significant project-controlled
liquidity. Small market cap launches at very cheap initial prices
bring with them the potential abuses of team and whale purchases.
The larger the market capitalization that is controlled by the DAO,
the less likely it becomes that whales and insiders can purchase
inexpensive tokens on the market. DAO governance is the ideal
vehicle for this governance issue. The larger the liquidity of a
project the less likely whales can control and manipulate the tokens.
DAO governance over liquidity makes it much less likely that
whales have the power to manipulate the token market or
misappropriate tokens etc.
(3) No Special Rules for Insiders
The equal token distribution logic has significant implications. If all
tokens get distributed equally to the participants in the token sale,
by implication, no tokens may be distributed before or after the
token sale to insiders, such as the team, the founders, associated
whales and core investors, advisors, and marketing teams. This rule
is perhaps the most important key staple of the fair launch doctrine
and cannot be subject to exceptions. Any exceptions to this rule
should result in the loss of the designation fair token launch.
(4) Revenue Allocation to Users
A key component of a fair launch involves the treatment of revenue
and profits of the fair launch project. Since the main mandate of the
fair launch is equitable treatment of the public, fair launches
typically involve a mandate to distribute any and all revenue and
profits of the project to their community investors.
Uniswap V2 provides a good example of a protocol that has a viable
product and produces revenue that is allocated back to its token
holders. The Uniswap code is open-source and the Uniswap 0.3%
swap fee gets automatically distributed back to the respective
liquidity providers. Open-source code and protocol fee flowback to
users guarantee transparency, accountability, market confidence in
the products, and the associated protections for the community.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

(5) Permissible Carve-Outs
While the equitable treatment of the public is paramount for fair
token launches, economic realities of digital asset start-ups may
require certain trade-offs and compromises.
(a) Start-up Expenses
In most fair launches, the start-up and community engagement cost
are cost the founders of the fair launch incurred and would prefer to
get reimbursed for. As a matter of fact, it may not be feasible to get
founders who operate without funding to keep spending time and
resources on the project without payback assurances.
The overwhelming majority of fair launch projects and protocols
incur start-up expenses and need to pay their founding team and
developers. Not all fair launch projects and protocols are in a
position to raise outside capital in a reasonable timeframe.
Therefore, fair launch projects may desire to offset and or cover ab
initio, e.g. before the actual token launch to the public, the costs of
the project. While it is generally against the majority view on fair
launches, which dictate that no tokens are distributed before the
public, it may be possible for some projects to allocate project
tokens to cover such startup expenses. However, in order to
maintain the spirit of fair launch, such token allocations before the
public launch should be fully transparent and announced to the
community with a community audit of the books, as desired.
(b) Public Marketing Permissions
Marketing of the fair launch token is an important expense for the
project founders that helps assure equitable treatment of the public.
Without significant marketing of the project, it is less likely the
token will reach a diverse set of market participants. Projects that
only reach a few hundred investors and only small million-dollar
market caps are much more prone to abuse and manipulation. While
there are no assurances. The deeper the market in a token the less
likely it will be abused. Marketing expenses help create a deep
liquid market in the token and should be incentivized, if permissible
in the jurisdiction of choice for the respective fair launch project.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
Opponents to the general rule of no special rules for insiders often
argue that certain carve-outs are inevitable and necessary. To assure
the success of a given fair launch, it can be permissible and
advantageous, under certain circumstances, to incentivize
marketing of the fair launch token offering through the public.
However, such public marketing incentives necessarily would have
to be fully transparent, fully accessible by the public without any
barriers to entry for the token community or any form of
gatekeeping. These equal opportunity access points cannot be
guaranteed and the process is subject to constant reevaluation. The
public marketing permission for any fair token launch should be
restricted to a limited percentage of total token supply.
d) Community Governance
The fairness to the public doctrine of fair launches can be
ascertained and reinforced through transparent decentralized
governance designs. The more decentralized the governance of a
fair launch protocol, the less likely the project will be seen as not
treating the public users unfairly. In this context, it may be advisable
for fair launch projects to be launched in a decentralized
autonomous organization (DAO) design.
DAOs can be part of a fair launch project from the beginning of the
community engagement. The more the DAO controls the
transparent public engagement of the token sale in the fair launch,
the more the public gets transparent and equitable process
assurances. A key component for the governance transparency that
is associated with DAO governance is the public forum of the DAO.
It may be advisable, in certain circumstances, to make the public
fair token launch a public engagement in the DAO forum where the
terms and conditions of the launch may be publicly announced and
voted on in a fully transparent fashion by the DAO community that
governs the fair token launch.
(1) Level of Decentralization
The level of decentralization of the DAO that may govern a fair
token launch is critical for the fair launch. If the respective DAO is
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

controlled by a handful of people in a foundation setting, it is less
likely that decentralized governance metrics take hold in the DAO.
Accordingly, it is less likely that the public can benefit from the
decentralized community governance over the fair launch. By
contrast, if the DAO that decides the fair launch metrics uses as
decentralized design12 that is fully transparent in the DAO forum
and provides community feedback effects, the community obtains
additional assurances that their involvement in the fair token launch
is based on sound governance principles that reinforce the fair
launch logic. DAO governance can, thus, become a core pillar of
fair launches.
The DAO governance of the project also should dictate any updates
for the project code or other initiatives in a fully transparent way via
the DAO forum and other public communication channels. The
level of decentralization of the DAO and the associate voting rights
are important in this context. DAO governance that revolves around
fungible governance tokens is disfavored and dangerous in this
context as governance rights can be bought on open exchanges. By
contrast, non-fungible reputation governance of the DAO assures
highest levels of decentralization. With that come community
guarantees that further enhance the fair launch philosophy of the
respective project.
(2) No Control by Insiders
Directly associate with DAO governance is the level of team control
in a fair launch. The more the DAO community oversees the fair
launch the less the founders and the team are able to exercise
control. As DAOs make disproportional use of smart contracts to
engage with the community and coordinate their own community
voting behavior, the community of investors gets additional
transparency and accountability.
Community DAO governance also makes any form of rug pulls
much less likely as rug pulls typically only benefit a few select
individuals who retained control over the project code or liquidity.
12 Craig Calcaterra & Wulf Kaal, Decentralization – How Technology Impacts
Business and Society, DeGruyter (2021). Link [______].
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
More specifically, DAO governance over token launch wallets can
assure that no single individual exercises rights over the token
launch wallet and becomes a single point of failure/abuse. Through
DAO governance over the token launch wallet, the smart contracts
and multisig wallets provide public assurances over the liquidity of
the project during the entirely of the fair launch token sale.
Depending on the DAO design, the founders may have significant
influence over the DAO votes initially. However, higher levels of
DAO governance decentralization mitigate these centralization
effects quickly via the onboarding of new DAO members.
3. Commonalities
Two notable characteristics can be discerned from the definitions
above which may apply to all fair token launches:
1. Fairness to the public/community by offering equal
opportunities for token distribution – including, depending
on the preferences for purity of the fair launch design of
founders, the permissible carve-outs
2. Very limited opportunities for founders, developers, or other
insiders to access token distribution prior to the public
Despite these two overarching characteristics, many projects have
developed their own unique protocols to achieve what they believe
to be a fair launch.
IV. Fair Launch Protocols
Different technology solutions are being offered for fair launches.
Such technology solutions try to accomplish key objectives of fair
launches with technological guarantees.
A key problem that fair launch platforms hope to address is the issue
of whale token purchases that soak up supply at the earliest possible
time in the token launch. Such whale purchases can be the origin of
significant centralization of a token launch that may harm the
project for the entirely of its active market engagement. Moreover,
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

whale ownership of tokens can incentivize abusive practices such
as a “rug pull” for coin pairs on automated market makers (AMMs).
Such rug pull practices can come in a variety of fashions. For
example, a whale may guarantee an inside developer or business
head a percentage participation if the insider changes the code that
governs the project for a beneficial outcome that only benefits the
whale and its associates.
Technology platforms can create technology solutions that make
these types of abuses less likely. For example, fair technology
platforms may create technological guarantees that mandate forms
of fair auctions. During such fair auctions, the tokens that are listed
on the fair launch platforms may only be released in tranches, which
makes rug pulls overall less likely. Such token tranche listings may
offer a limited number of tokens for a limited number of days.
In an effort to make the auction process as secure as possible for the
community, fair launch platforms may mandate that at the end of
the auction time period, each tranche of tokens may deposit half of
the tokens in the tranche into a pair on a Uniswap V2 compatible
AMM. Thereafter, the other half of the tokens from the respective
tranche may be allocated to open market purchasers. The remaining
liquidity on the AMM may be burned to ensure that any incentives
for rug pulls are removed.
In an effort to make the platforms uses as attractive as possible for
the team and founders, fair launch platforms may allow the
founding team to remove tokens up to a certain percentage from the
platform. Such removed tokens may be used to help fund the
respective project. Similarly, platforms may allow the removal of
any fees that accumulated on the Uniswap V2 liquidity pair.
Unusable tokens that are trapped below the price floor for the
liquidity pair may be removed via a synthetic network token.
Platform calibrations for these types of technology-based solutions
for fair launches can vary widely and are subject to the ongoing
market discovery processes.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
One prominent example of a fair launch platform is Grin.13 Grin is
a privacy-preserving digital currency built openly by developers all
over the world.14 The project was said to be “highly transparent”
and the specs, including technical features/monetary policy were
well known by the community in advance. This gave the market
ample time to price the information.15 The hashing algorithms used
in Grin’s proof of work were publicly known through public
forums.16 Additionally, a dual-PoW was offered over the first 2
years, with one hashing algorithm targeting generalized hardware
and the other allowing for specialized optimizations (via ASIC).17
However, Grin did not privilege miners who could develop ASICs
prior to launch, rather they gradually scaled up the portion of coins
allocated to the ASIC-friendly algorithm over 2 years, allowing
hobbyist miners to participate.
1. Liquidity Mining
One of the dominant mechanisms used for fair launches is “liquidity
mining.”18 Liquidity mining describes a practice that entails users
of a decentralized finance product earning additional tokens on top
of the regularly expected yield for putting assets into a liquidity
pool.19 However, liquidity mining leads those who have more
liquidity/assets to disproportionally benefit from the fair launch
liquidity mining protocol.20
13 https://grin.mw/
14 Id.
15https://medium.com/@arjunblj/grin-and-the-mythical-fair-launch-
395ca87a5e73
16 Id.
17 Id.
18 https://synthesis.substack.com/p/fair-launches-will-disrupt-crypto
19 https://www.coindesk.com/markets/2021/05/28/liquidity-mining-will-return-
to-uniswap-very-soon-founder-
says/#:~:text=Liquidity%20mining%20is%20a%20kind%20of%20yield%20far
ming,pool%20%E2%80%93%20hence%20the%20term%2C%20%E2%80%9C
liquidity%20mining%20.%E2%80%9D
20 https://synthesis.substack.com/p/fair-launches-will-disrupt-crypto
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

Different tokens approximate supply owned by top 10 addresses.21
If the top 10 addresses own a disproportionally large supply of a
token, then the project or community becomes more centralized; an
outcome which fair launches seek to avoid.
2. Subscription
Another unique solution for projects looking to fairly launch their
digital assets is a subscription mechanism. This solution was created
in response to a limited supply and huge demand for NFT drops.22
Many anticipated NFT drops sell out in seconds, this leaves users
who are interested in the project no choice but to wait until the initial
owners decide to flip the NFTs for profit.23
In response, Binance implemented a subscription mechanism that
lets everyone have an equal opportunity to purchase newly released
NFTs on its marketplace.24 In essence, users who subscribe to the
mechanism have a higher weighted chance of being able to be
selected for the purchase of NFTs on the platform. This is achieved
21 Id.
22 https://cointelegraph.com/news/binance-implements-a-fair-way-to-purchase-
nfts?fbclid=IwAR1JG4DDOd20I75eSaFSjtoVF--uScl9O3g73AcM-
hT2KMLvUISVO55YmJQ
23 Id.
24 Id.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
by limiting the total allotted amount of NFT purchase per person,
following a randomly weighted buyer selection process.25 This
mechanism provides an equitable solution to high demand NFT
projects.
3. Auction
An auction mechanism for fair launch tokens ensures avoids that
tokens are priced cheaper than the underlying market value of the
token. This, in turn, helps remedy the problems that derive from
large whales token holders that can manipulate the market in the
future.
For any type of public auction of tokens in a fair launch context the
amount of tokens to be auctioned is often at issue. While it is hard
to make a hard recommendation on the amount of tokens for
auction, it is ill advised to auction more than 40% of the total token
supply. 10% of token supply should serve as a buffer. paired with
the funds raised to form permanently locked liquidity on a DEX.
The other 50% should be allocated to a DEX in a pair with the funds
from the token raise. The pair on the DEX provides long-term
locked liquidity for the token project.
4. Lottery
A lottery mechanism is another tool for fair launch platforms.26 In
lottery fair launch protocols a project sells tickets to their lottery
which in effect allocates tradeable tokens to users. Such tokens are
redeemable for an NFT at a community-crowdsourced price. All
these lottery mechanisms are combined with anti-rug provisions for
investors, the community, and projects.27
Lottery fair launch protocols can be broken down into three parts:
Lottery phase, Waiting period, and Redemption:
25 Id.
26 https://scapesnft.medium.com/fair-launch-protocol-guide-72dc9609461e
27 Id.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

1. Lottery phase28
a. Ticket Buying: information about the project will be
publicly disclosed (lottery dates, % of treasury the
project is allowed to withdraw). Users then decide
how much they are willing to pay for a ticket. If a
user bids low, they increase the potential for
secondary market return but decrease their chances
of winning the lottery since more users can afford to
participate. If a user bids high, they increase the
secondary market risk but also increase the chances
of winning the lottery.
b. Price Setting: price of a ticket is determined as the
median of all tickets purchased – users then decide
whether they accept the price. If price is higher than
a user’s bid, they must pay the difference to
participate or choose to withdraw and get a refund.
c. Token Distribution: If demand exceeds the number
of NFTs offered, then distribution will be managed
by lottery
2. Waiting Period29: many projects will use this protocol for
fundraising. Therefore, the Waiting Period is the time
between the end of the lottery and the delivery date. During
this period, the NFT IOU tokens that are distributed may be
traded on a decentralized exchange.
3. Redemption30: once the delivery date arrives, users will be
provided with a mechanism to redeem their token for an
NFT.
28 Id.
29 Id.
30 Id.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
Proponents of this protocol argue that it puts the community of a
project first because it allows the community to set the price.31
5. Counteract Centralization of Token Supply
Fair launch protocols may attempt to counteract the centralization
of token supply. For example, both short- and long-term incentives
may be offered as part of the rewards structure. Incentives should
not only reward short term liquidity providers, but also long-term
participants and community participation via proposals, voting, or
other forms of work that help grow and sustain the network.
Some fair launch protocols may choose non-linear rewards. Fair
launch protocols can create some form of weighting, tier, and/or
logarithmic curves for rewards. This decentralizes disproportionate
returns, so they do not scale linearly with the amount user liquidity
a user has. Alternatively, fair launch protocols can consider phased
rewards. This means rewards will be distributed to different users
based on the project’s development (pre-alpha, alpha, beta, public
mainnet, etc.).
Another option for fair launch protocols is to implement a fair
launch rewards protocol based on user archetype. This reward
structure is based on the user’s archetype or historical on chain
activity. For example, fair launch protocols can calculate how the
users conduct themselves within the network. Such ethical conduct
can measure whether the user engages with the protocol
consistently, invests, and votes on the fair launch protocol network
over time. By contrast, users who merely use the network for yield
farming may not qualify as they lack engagement.
V. Conclusion
Fair launch protocols provide many beneficial features that help the
market for digital assets mature and overcome its immaturity
constrains. Fair launch protocols and fair launch practices will
continue to evolve and improve the capital formation for digital asset
startups. Bad practices and the lack of standards and a nomenclature
31 Id.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

in fair launch protocols will over time evolve via voluntary or
mandated industry practices. Through fair launch evolution and
continuous practice improvements, the fair launch industry and
underlying digital asset businesses can become the foundation of the
emerging decentralized digital asset economy.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

FAIR TOKEN LAUNCH
Bibliography
https://medium.com/alpineintel/on-fair-token-launches-
3d500dc0576c
https://medium.com/@arjunblj/grin-and-the-mythical-fair-launch-
395ca87a5e73
https://cointelegraph.com/news/fair-launch-tokens-outshine-the-
average-coin-s-performance
https://cryptonews.com/exclusives/is-fair-launch-a-better-model-
for-token-distribution-7825.htm
https://blog.mexo.io/glossary/fair-launch-coin-or-token/
F. Bruschi, M. Tumiati, V. Rana, M. Bianchi, D. Sciuto, A Scalable
decentralized system for fair token distribution and seamless users
onboarding, Blockchain: Research and Applications (2021), doi.:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcra.2021.100031
https://www.fairlaunch.capital/
https://www.finextra.com/blogposting/20638/understanding-
tokenomics-the-real-value-of-crypto
Louis Carter, John R. Ziegler, Ovidui Purice, Edward Lener, “The
Free Education Project: Higher Education Funding, E2
Implementation, and Crowdsourcing Crypto Development”, City
University of New York, CUNY Academic Works, (2019). see
https://academicworks.cuny.edu/bx_pubs/77/
https://www.marketwatch.com/press-release/the-fair-launch-
foundation-makes-the-people-their-vc-with-smartcoin-jade-
protocol-a-new-ohm-fork-2021-12-02
https://scapesnft.medium.com/fair-launch-protocol-guide-
72dc9609461e
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

Fabian Schar, Decentralized Finance: On Blockchain and Smart
Contract-Based Financial Markets, Economic Research, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Vol. 103, No. 2 (2021).
https://lexdao.substack.com/p/a-legal-engineers-guide-to-a-fair
https://synthesis.substack.com/p/fair-launches-will-disrupt-crypto
https://grin.mw/
Stephen Castell, Blockchain Technology and Innovations in
Business Processes: Slaying the Crypto Dragons: Towards a
CryptoSure Trust Model for Crypto-Economics. Springer
Singapore, pg. 49 – 65, (2021).
Carol R. Goforth, Regulation of Crypto: Who is the Securities and
Exchange Commission Protecting?, 58 Am. Bus. L.J. 643 (2021).
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4015908

