VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
BY
WULF A. KAAL *
AND
ERIK P.M. VERMEULEN *
* Associate Professor, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis). The authors would like to
thank the participants at the 2015 Annual Meeting of the Midwestern Law and Economics Association,
especially Bill Black, [____], and research librarians Nick Farris and Ann Bateson.
* Professor of Business & Financial Law, Tilburg Law School - Department of Business Law.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
ABSTRACT
Disruptive innovation creates increasing regulatory challenges. Venture capital’s
assessment of innovative products, businesses, and initiatives generates highly relevant
institution- and industry-specific decentralized information on innovation trends. Using a
dataset comprising over 75,000 venture capital deals with over 35,000 companies in the
United States from 2005 to 2015, we show how venture capitalists’ innovation driven
finance allocation can provide feedback on innovation trends and associated risks for
rulemakers, optimize the timing of regulation, and support anticipatory rulemaking.
Keywords: Disruptive Innovation, Growth of Technology, Venture Capital, Venture
Investments, Seed Capital and Series, Dynamic Regulation, Feedback Effects, Optimized
Information for Regulation, Anticipatory Regulation, Big Data, Panel Data
JEL Classification:
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 4
II. CHARACTERISTICS OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION ...................................................... 8
III. VENTURE CAPITAL IMPACT ON INNOVATION ........................................................ 14
IV. DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION AS A REGULATORY CHALLENGE .................................. 15
1. Ex Post Trial-and-Error Rulemaking ................................................................. 19
2. Stable and Presumptively Optimal Rules ........................................................... 19
3. Timing ................................................................................................................ 20
4. Unknown Future Contingencies ......................................................................... 22
V. DYNAMIC REGULATION AS A REGULATORY SUPPLEMENT ..................................... 23
VI. DATA .................................................................................................................... 26
1. Capital Invested and Deal Count ....................................................................... 27
2. VC Investors ....................................................................................................... 27
3. Deal Characteristics .......................................................................................... 32
4. Industries Represented ....................................................................................... 34
5. Investment Ratio by Industry .............................................................................. 36
6. Innovation Sustainability ................................................................................... 37
7. Exit ..................................................................................................................... 42
VII. VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION ..... 47
VIII. CONCLUSION ...................................................................................................... 48
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
I. Introduction
Disruptive innovation has shaped and reshaped industries throughout history.
Disruptive innovation can take the form of new business models, new products or
services, or new ways of delivering existing products and services to consumers, while
addressing unmet consumer needs.1 Disruptive innovation is characterized by scientific
discoveries that change existing technological product paradigms and provide the
foundation for more competitive new technologies and products to emerge.2 Disruptive
technological innovation is often associated with the emergence of completely new
technologies, the new combination and application of existing technologies, and the
application of new technologies to specific societal problem areas, each precipitating a
significant paradigm shift for product technology or creating entirely new paradigms.3
The combination of these factors facilitates sudden exponential improvements in the
value proposition for customers by enabling discontinuous innovations of processes,
products, and services.4 Human-robot collaboration, constant body monitoring, and
driverless cars5 are examples of disruptive technological innovations that will transform
our markets, transport, and health systems.
Disruptive innovation presents significant regulatory challenges. As disruptive
technologies emerge and grow, they are bound to morph, shift, and merge with other
1 DIRECTORATE FOR FINANCIAL AND ENTERPRISE AFFAIRS COMPETITION COMMITTEE, HEARING ON
DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION (2015), https://goo.gl/3kSCi6.
2 The original “disruptive innovation” terminology came from the famous Bower and Christensen article in
the Harvard Business Review. Joseph L. Bower & Clayton M. Christensen, Disruptive Technologies:
Catching the Wave, 73 HARV. BUS. REV. 43, 44 (1995) (“The technological changes that damage
established companies are usually not radically new or difficult from a technological point of view. They
do, however, have two important characteristics: First, they typically present a different package of
performance attributes - ones that, at least at the outset, are not valued by existing customers. Second, the
performance attributes that existing customers do value improve at such a rapid rate that the new
technology can later invade those established markets”). There is no widely accepted definition that exists
for discontinuous and disruptive innovation. Instead, many scholars focus on different aspects: such as
industry-wide product technology factors to the gap between substitutable technological learning curves on
a cost or performance basis, definitions of discontinuous innovation focus on customer behaviour, product
newness, market factors or a combination of these factors. For an overview of the disruptive innovation
definitions used in the literature, see Ronald N. Kostoff et al., Disruptive Technology Roadmaps, 71 TECH.
FORECASTING & SOCIAL CHANGE 141, 142-144 (2004).
3 Id.
4 See Robert W. Veryzer, Jr., Discontinuous Innovation and the New Product Development Process, 15 J.
PROD. INNOV. MANAG. 304 (1998); Gary S. Lynn et al., Marketing and Discontinuous Innovation: The
Probe and Learn Process, 38 CAL. MANAGEMENT REV. 8 (1996). See also Steven T. Walsh, Roadmapping
a Disruptive Technology: A Case Study, The Emerging Microsystems and Top-Down Nanosystems Industry,
71 TECH. FORECASTING & SOC. CHANGE 161, 165 (2004) (“Two views of disruptive technologies arise
from this literature. One emphasizes the ‘different’ nature of the technology, whereas the other
emphasizes the emerging high technology nature. Bower and Christensen champion the ‘different’ nature
of disruptive technologies emphasizing that they may not be ‘radically new from a technological point of
view’ but have superior ‘performance trajectories’ along critical dimensions that customers value. Abernathy
and Clark and others argue that disruptive technologies’ radical newness or emergent character is an
important element in its definition since robust manufacturing infrastructure is either limited or
nonexistent.”).
5 Gavriel Avigdor & Rene Wintjes, Trend Report: Disruptive innovations and Forward-Looking Policies
Towards Smart Value Chains 5-7 (European Union, Business Innovation Observatory No. 190, 2015),
http://goo.gl/PUwnwn.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
emerging disruptive trends in constantly accelerating and changing ways. Disruptive
technology convergence can bring with it unexpected and sudden changes in areas that
are already quietly incubating. These new developments and trends are going to
increasingly impact consumer preferences and behavior, products, the financial industry,6
industry practices, delivery channels, and possible regulatory responses to changes in any
of these. The ex-post trial-and-error-rulemaking with stable and presumptively optimal
rules7 in the existing regulatory framework8 often produces suboptimal regulatory
outcomes that are no longer sustainable in an environment of exponential disruptive
innovation. While ex-post trial-and-error-rulemaking with stable and presumptively
optimal rules in the historically evolved legal infrastructure was sufficiently able to cope
with its inherent collective action problems,9 regulatory cycles,10 trial-and-error
rulemaking,11 systemic constraints, and path dependencies, the exponential growth of
6 Chris Brummer, Disruptive Technology and Securities Regulation, FORDHAM L. REV. (forthcoming 2015-
2016) (manuscript at 1), http://goo.gl/kBelUm (“This [a]rticle explains how technological innovation not
only “disrupts” capital markets—but also the exercise of regulatory supervision and oversight. It provides
the first theoretical account tracking the migration of technology across multiple domains of today’s
securities infrastructure and argues that an array of technological innovations are facilitating what can be
understood as the disintermediation of the traditional gatekeepers that regulatory authorities have relied on
(and regulated) since the 1930s for investor protection and market integrity.”).
7 The existing regulatory infrastructure, including Congress, regulatory agencies, self-regulatory bodies, and
the literature on regulation, relies almost exclusively on stable and presumptively optimal rules. Stable and
presumptively optimal rules are created to address perceived regulatory issues identified by lawmakers
through centralized information in the then existing economic and market conditions. Stable and
presumptively optimal rules are tailored and drafted to attain permanent solutions for perceived regulatory
issues that have sufficient political support at the time of drafting. See Wulf A. Kaal, Evolution of Law:
Dynamic Regulation in a New Institutional Economics Framework in FESTSCHRIFT ZU EHREN VON
CHRISTIAN KIRCHNER (Wulf A. Kaal, Matthias Schmidt & Andreas Schwartze eds., 2014) 1211, 1212
[hereinafter Kaal in FS Kirchner]. (“[T]he institutional infrastructure for rulemaking was geared towards
the creation of rules for governing a relatively stable society with less upward mobility and relatively stable
economic and market environments.”); Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services
Industry, 48 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 791 (2013)[hereinafter Kaal Wake Forest]; Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic
Regulation via Governmental Contracts, in FESTSCHRIFT FÜR PETER NOBEL ZUM 70 (Peter Sester et al. eds.,
2015) 65, http://ssrn.com/abstract=2517677 [hereinafter Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel]; Wulf A.
Kaal & Timothy Lacine, The Effect of Deferred and Non-Prosecution Agreements on Corporate
Governance: Evidence from 1993-2013, 70 BUS. LAW. 61 (2014) [hereinafter Kaal & Lacine 2014].
8 See KARL POPPER, THE POVERTY OF HISTORICISM (1957); Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 2 (“Since
then, society and markets have evolved rapidly and are becoming increasingly more complex. The growing
number of rule enactments, revisions, and revocations suggests that existing rules and institutional
structures for rulemaking are becoming less capable of addressing the rapid pace of change.”).
9 John C. Coffee, Jr., The Political Economy of Dodd-Frank: Why Financial Reform Tends To Be
Frustrated and Systemic Risk Perpetuated, 97 CORNELL L. REV. 1019, 1020-1022 (2012); Kaal in Liber
Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7.
Smaller and better-organized special interest groups typically control dispersed investors and other
dominant latent groups in the competition to influence the rulemaking process. MANCUR OLSON, JR., THE
LOGIC OF COLLECTIVE ACTION, (1965). The predominance of special interest groups in the rulemaking
process can be temporarily overcome during and after crises when political entrepreneurs assume the
transaction costs of organizing the otherwise disinterested latent groups. ELINOR OSTROM, GOVERNING THE
COMMONS: THE EVOLUTION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION (1990).
10 Coffee, supra note 9; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra
note 7.
11 Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Popper, supra note 8; Christian
Kirchner, Evolution of Law̶̶̶̶̶̶ ̶Interplay Between Private and Public Rule-Making: A New Institutional
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
disruptive innovation is likely to expose the depth of insufficiencies and design flaws of
the existing regulatory and institutional infrastructure. More specifically, in an
environment of exponential disruptive innovation, relevant information for rulemaking is
less likely to materialize soon enough for traditional trial-and-error rulemaking to be
effective, regulatory issues become increasingly complex, and unknown future
contingencies increase substantially in the rulemaking process.12 In short, exponential
disruptive innovation has the potential to overwhelm the existing regulatory process.13
Policy makers and scholars are debating possible policy responses to address the
regulatory challenges associated with disruptive innovation. Some suggest that the
regulatory challenges associated with disruptive innovation can only be effectively
addressed through principles-based regulation because the existing rulemaking
procedures lack sufficient speed and flexibility. 14 Others see disruptive innovation
predominantly as a competition law and antitrust issue.15 Early intervention,16 rulemaking
petitions, and retrospective review may be more appropriate remedies for the effects of
disruptive innovation that also can help address the regulatory sine curve.17 Assuming
that regulatory innovation is subject to an interdependent ecological system, others
propose networks for the diffusion of improved regulatory technology.18 Recognizing
that ex ante regulation has diminished significance in the context of regulation disruptive
innovation and AI, others see research, development, and public operation as the only
ways to identify harmful innovation.19 Chris Brummer suggests a form of regulatory
experimentalism including selectively adopt trial periods for new regulatory
Economics Analysis, 4 ERASMUS L. REV. 161 (2012).
12 See infra Fn. [_]-[_] and accompanying text.
13 Because rulemakers are still attempting to comprehend the regulatory demands of the last wave of
innovative solutions, technologies, and applications while the next wave of innovation is already in full
force, exponential disruptive innovation is likely to intensify the frequencies of the regulatory sine curve
that is recognized by the literature. Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Coffee, supra note 9 at 1029-1037;
John C. Coffee, Jr., Systemic Risk After Dodd-Frank: Contingent Capital and the Need For Regulatory
Strategies Beyond Oversight, 111 COLUM. L. REV. 795, 821 (2011).
14 Barefoot, supra note 52, at 9.
15 Inge Graef et al., How Google and Others Upset Competition Analysis: Disruptive Innovation and
European Competition Law (Conference Paper, 25th European Regional Conference of the International
Telecommunications Society, Brussels, Belgium, Jun. 22-25, 2014),
http://econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/101378/1/795226780.pdf.
16 Nathan Cortez, Regulating Disruptive Innovation, 29 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 175, 175 (2014) (“With
novel technologies, agencies also risk paralysis by analysis. New technologies often present unforeseen
risks if under-regulated and dramatic opportunity costs if overregulated. The inclination of most regulators
is to avoid both extremes. . . . Regulators also tend to overvalue gathering information about new
technologies, which further distorts decisions on regulatory timing. . . . early interventions can benefit both
regulated industry and regulatory beneficiaries. . . . early interventions may also benefit from a more
objective regulatory atmosphere, before parties become entrenched and adversarial.”).
17 Reeve T. Bull, Building A Framework for Governance: Retrospective Review and Rulemaking Petitions,
67 ADMIN. L. REV. 265, 293-306 (2015) (urging regulatory agencies to expand the use of petitions for
rulemaking and retrospective review to achieve smarter regulation).
18 Jonathan B. Wiener, The regulation of technology, and the technology of regulation, 26 TECH. IN SOC’Y
483, 496 (2004) (“Fourth, we should foster networks for the diffusion of regulatory innovations.
Just as private technology diffusion is crucial to economic prosperity, so the diffusion
of improved public regulatory technology is crucial to social progress.”).
19 Scherer, supra note 73, at 43-44.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
approaches.20 This form of micro-level regulatory experimentation could later be
expanded to “system-wide enterprise zones for financial market compliance and
regulatory adaptation.”21
An emerging literature explores the use of informal regulation.22 Wu suggests that
traditional rulemaking is regularly impracticable in rapidly developing industries where
highly informal methods can be justified.23 Rather than relying on traditional regulatory
means in the existing regulatory framework, Wu suggests regulatory agencies
confronting disruptive innovations should utilize “threats” for the disruptive industries
packaged in guidance documents, warning letters etc., because such threats can help
avoid regulation that is inappropriately calibrated or premature. 24 Threats are less
burdensome than traditional regulatory approaches, more flexible, can be better fine-
tuned, and signal regulatory intent appropriately.25
We apply the theoretical framework on dynamic regulation as established by
Kaal26 to regulatory issues associated with disruptive innovation. The theory of dynamic
regulation conceptualizes the study of regulatory phenomena in relation to preceding and
20 Brummer, supra note 6, at 50 (“So for example, the ban on general solicitation could be lifted for five
years, with a sunset provision triggered absent some additional regulatory blessing. Or more onerous
investigatory requirements on portals could be lifted where other (statistical or algorithmic) technologies
are used to test or limit exposures of retail investors in crowdfunded securities, but likewise set to expire
absent some regulatory finding that they insufficiently track or identify breaches in prudential requirements
for investors.”).
21 Id. at 53 (“for example, avenues of special information sharing and expedited assistance could be opened
with targeted industry members for the fulfillment of desired regulatory objectives. Or investment tax
credits could be provided for market participants that undertake strategies to bolster investor protection or
market stability.”).
22 See e.g., Tim Wu, Agency Threats, 60 DUKE L.J. 1841 (2011).
23 Id. at 1841 (“There are three main ways in which agencies regulate: rulemaking; adjudication; and
informal tools of guidance, also called nonlegislative or interpretative rules. Over the last two decades,
agencies have increasingly favored the use of the last of these three, which can include statements of best
practices, interpretative guides, private warning letters, and press releases.”).
24 Id. at 1849 (“Of the three options, the first--making law--may be the worst alternative. What sounds
attractive is the prospect of an orderly, planned approach to the future. The problem is that, with so little
known about the industry, issuing specific rules based on guesses about the future runs a grave risk of
creating a bad law, or at least a law that is much worse than one issued after more development. Such
lawmaking suffers from all of the defects that Friedrich Hayek identified with central planning--impressive
in a world of perfect information, but terrible in this world.”); Contra Cortez, supra note 16, at 175
(arguing that “a flexible initial posture based primarily on “threats” can calcify, creating weak defaults that
lead to suboptimal regulation in the long term. . . .If agencies are concerned about regulating prematurely or
in error, then they can experiment with timing rules, alternative enforcement mechanisms, and other
variations on traditional interventions. If agencies do choose to proceed by making threats, then they should
use them as a short-term precursor to more decisive, legally binding action, as the FCC did, and avoid
relying on them as a long-term crutch, as the FDA did.”); Jerry Brito, "Agency Threats" and the Rule of
Law: An Offer You Can't Refuse, 37 HARV. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 553, 554 (2014) (“I conclude that not only is
Wu's thesis wrong, but it is also dangerous. Part I of this article reviews Wu's essay, defining what
constitutes an agency threat and when it is justified according to Wu. Part II critiques Wu's thesis by
showing, among other things, that it is based on a false dilemma; that it assumes an unwarranted level of
knowledge on the part of regulators; that it assumes--contrary to evidence--that regulators are good proxies
for the public interest; and that it ignores the costs of eschewing the regulatory process.”).
25 Wu, supra note 25 at 1843 (“Both agency and industry will sometimes share an interest in an informal
and flexible regime that resembles an unenforceable “letter of intent” in the world of private contracts.”)
26 Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS
Kirchner, supra note 7.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
succeeding events, using institution-specific and decentralized information to facilitate
feedback effects for anticipatory rulemaking.27 The dynamic regulatory framework
allows rulemaking to overcome its historic constraints and path dependencies that
traditionally focused the rulemaking process on stable and presumptively optimal rules.
Evolving from a historically reactive process based only on preceding events and driven
by the agency- and collective-action problem of rulemaking, rulemaking in a dynamic
framework allows for the anticipation of future innovation trends and their associated
contingencies. Most important for the context of this article, the rapid pace of
technological developments in the telecommunications industry necessitated the use of
dynamic elements in regulation.28 The exponential growth of innovation discussed in this
article29 shows some parallels to the pace of technological developments in
telecommunications markets.
We show that venture capital can function as a dynamic regulatory supplement for
disruptive innovation. Venture capital’s financial allocations to innovative projects can
provide feedback for dynamic regulation of disruptive innovation. We show how this
approach can help optimize the timing of regulation and provide anticipatory rules. We
use a PitchBook Data, Inc. dataset on venture capital investments with over 75,000
venture capital deals to illustrate that venture capital finance allocation and deal flow,
among other venture capital related data, provide institution-specific decentralized
information on innovation trends that can provide feedback effects for dynamic
regulation of disruptive innovation. Venture capitalists’ investment allocations can
measure both the risks associated with innovative developments as well as the economic
opportunities associated with such innovation.
This article has six parts. After a short introduction in Part I, Part II defines the
phenomenon of disruptive innovation and outlines the challenges presented by disruptive
innovation. Part III evaluates the literature on the effect of venture capital on innovation.
Part IV analyzes the regulatory challenges presented by disruptive innovation. Part V
introduces the theoretical framework for dynamic regulation before Part VI introduces
the data and evaluates different venture capital metrics that provide feedback for
regulators on innovation. In Part VII we discuss how the information and feedback
provided by venture capital data can be used as a dynamic supplement for regulation. Part
VI concludes.
II. Characteristics of Disruptive Innovation
Disruptive innovation is characterized by scientific discoveries that change the
existing technological product paradigms and provide the foundation for more
27 Id at 11.
28 See Johannes M. Bauer & Erik Bohlin, From Static to Dynamic Regulation: Recent Developments in US
Telecommunications Policy, 2008 INTERECONOMICS 38, 40–42 (discussing competition in
telecommunications); Paul W.J. de Bijl & Martin Peitz, Dynamic Regulation and Entry in
Telecommunications Markets: A Policy Framework, 16 INFO. ECON. & POL’Y 411, 411 (2004); Machiel
van Dijk & Machiel Mulder, Regulation of Telecommunication and Deployment of Broadband (CPB
Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis No. 121, Dec. 2005),
https://ideas.repec.org/p/cpb/memodm/131.html (exploring whether telecommunication regulations
encourage or hamper new technological development).
29 See infra Parts Fn. [_]-[_] and accompanying text.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
competitive new technologies and products to emerge.30 By enabling discontinuous
innovations of processes, products, and services, disruptive technological innovations
facilitate exponential improvements in the value proposition for customers.31 Disruptive
technological innovation can be characterized by the emergence of completely new
technologies, the new combination and application of existing technologies, and the
application of new technologies to specific societal problem areas, each precipitating a
significant paradigm shift for product technology or creating entirely new paradigms.32
Disruptive innovation exemplifies Schumpeter’s “Creative Destruction,”33 i.e., the
creation of competitive strength through innovation that is followed by new demand in
new markets while destroying older and less competitive technologies and existing
markets that are based on older and less competitive technologies.34
The literature on management has studied the implications of disruptive
technologies and innovation since the mid 1990s.35 The literature warned businesses
that disrupter startups would attract new lower-end consumers by offering inexpensive
substitutes for products and would then gradually move upmarket by attracting higher-
end consumers, suggesting that businesses act quickly when disrupters appear and either
acquire the disrupter or incubate a competing business that embraces the disruptive
technology. 36 A market leader’s lack of investment in disruptive technologies often
results in the abrupt loss of market dominance and often even total replacement in such
30 See supra note 2.
31 See supra note 4.
32 Kostoff et al., supra note 2, at 142; Steven T. Walsh & Jonathan D. Linton, Infrastructure for Emergent
Industries Based on Discontinuous Innovations, 12 ENG. MANAG. J. 23, 24 (2000).
33 Schumpeter described the “gaels of creative destruction”, often unleashed by technology, that
periodically sweep through industries and sink weak and outdated firms. JOSEPH A. SCHUMPETER,
CAPITALISM, SOCIALISM, AND DEMOCRACY 83-84 (3rd ed. 1962) (“The opening up of new markets, foreign
or domestic, and the organizational development from the craft shop and factory to such concerns as U.S.
Steel illustrate the process of industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure
from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one. This process of Creative
Destruction is the essential fact about capitalism. It is what capitalism consists in and what every capitalist
concern has got to live in . . . Every piece of business strategy acquires its true significance only against the
background of that process and within the situation created by it. It must be seen in its role in the perennial
gale of creative destruction; it cannot be understood irrespective of it or, in fact, on the hypothesis that there
is a perennial lull.”)
34 Aron S. Spencer & Bruce A. Kirchhoff, Schumpeter and New Technology Based Firms: Towards a
Framework for How NTBFs Cause Creative Destruction, 2 INT’L ENTREPRENEURSHIP & MGMT. J. 145, 148
(2006) (“However, the new entrant is able to find or create a market for the innovation, where it matures,
and improves in performance. When the performance achieves rough parity with the old product, the new
product sweeps through the market, offering equal or superior performance along with a smaller size and
reduced price. The old product, and frequently the firm that produced it, exit the market. It is quite clear
that this phenomenon is, in fact, “creative destruction”.”).
35 CLAYTON M. CHRISTENSEN, THE INNOVATOR’S DILEMMA: WHEN NEW TECHNOLOGIES CAUSE GREAT
FIRMS TO FAIL (1997); GEOFFREY MOORE, CROSSING THE CHASM (1991).
36 Bower & Christensen, supra note 2; LARRY DOWNES & PAUL NUNES, BIG BANG DISRUPTION (2013).
Contra Andrew A. King & Baljir Baatartogokh, How Useful is the Theory of Disruptive Innovation?, 57
MIT SLOAN MGMT. REV. 77 (2015) (“In summary, although Christensen and Raynor selected the 77 cases
as examples of the theory of disruptive innovation, our survey of experts reveals that many of the cases do
not correspond closely with the theory. In fact, their responses suggest that only seven of the cases (9%)
contained all four elements of the theory that we asked about.”).
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
markets.37 Market leaders often shortsightedly refuse to cannibalize their market dominance
through the use of disruptive technologies. This enables small entrepreneurial firms with no
established customer base to take advantage of disruptive technologies and redefine such
markets.38 Market leaders, successful institutions, and managers fail when they do not
distinguish sustaining technologies from disruptive technologies.39
Successful disruptive products of the last fifteen years displayed shared core
characteristics that were facilitated by growth and advancement in core disruptive
technologies. Revolutionizing products in the past few decades that were based on
disruptive technological innovation were typically smaller in size, lighter, cheaper, more
convenient and flexible, more reliable, had better unit performance with higher
efficiency, and were more user friendly than prior products.40 These characteristics typically
require significant advances and growth in artificial intelligence and technologies
including micro- or nanotechnologies, as well as materials- and component technologies.
Disruptive innovation via so-called big-bang disruptions differs from more-
traditional innovation. Big-bang disruptors not only often offer a much cheaper product
in comparison with the established products but they are also better integrated with other
37 Bower & Christensen, supra note 2, at 43 (“One of the most consistent patterns in business is the failure
of leading companies to stay at the top of their industries when technologies or markets change”).
38 Id. at 51 (“Small, hungry organizations are good at placing economical bets, rolling with the punches,
and agilely changing product and market strategies in response to feedback from initial forays into the
market”); Constantinos D. Charitou & Constantinos C. Markides, Responses to Disruptive Strategic
Innovation, 44 MIT SLOAN MGMT. REV. 55, 56 (2003) (“Second, disruptive strategic innovations usually
start out as small and low-margin businesses. That’s why they rarely gain support or long-term
commitment from established competitors. The innovations are small and are not attractive until they start
growing.”); Contra Larry Downes & Paul Nunes, Big-Bang Disruption, 91 HARV. BUS. REV. 44, 46
(2013), https://hbr.org/2013/03/big-bang-disruption/ (“The strategic model of disruptive innovation we’ve
all become comfortable with has a blind spot. It assumes that disrupters start with a lower-priced, inferior
alternative that chips away at the least profitable segments, giving an incumbent business time to start a
skunkworks and develop its own next-generation products. That advice hasn’t been much help to
navigation-product makers like TomTom, Garmin, and Magellan. Free navigation apps, now preloaded on
every smartphone, are not only cheaper but better than the stand-alone devices those companies sell. And
thanks to the robust platform provided by the iOS and Android operating systems, navigation apps are
constantly improving, with new versions distributed automatically through the cloud.”).
39 Sustaining technologies are technologies that improve the performance of existing products through
close cooperation with customers. By contrast, disruptive technologies provide value parameters not
recognized by the mainstream market and in the short-run can even show less product performance in
comparison with the existing products that are valued by the mainstream market. Kostoff et al., supra
note 2 at 144 (“The near-term individual rewards from sustaining technologies that yield short-term low-risk
payoffs displace the longer term social benefits that could result from proactive high-risk high-payoff
disruptive technology selection. The procedural problem is that technology selection decisions, especially in
large established commercial and government organizations, are increasingly being made by larger and
more inclusive committees, a process traditionally steeped in tradition and conservatism.
Revolutionary disruptive concepts are less likely (on average) to receive committee approval than
evolutionary sustaining concepts.”).
40 Kostoff et al., supra note 2, at 143; Walsh, supra note 4, at 170 (“Bower and Christensen champion the
“different” nature of disruptive technologies emphasizing that they may not be “radically new from a
technological point of view” but have superior “performance trajectories” along critical dimensions that
customers' value. Abernathy and Clark and others argue that disruptive technologies' radical newness or
emergent character is an important element in its definition since robust manufacturing infrastructure is
either limited or nonexistent.”).
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
products and services and are often more inventive.41 In today’s age of social media, big-
bang disruptors can successfully exploit consumers’ advanced access to product
information and consumers’ ability to contribute to products and share such contributions
and products improvements via social media and other outlets.42 Internet fads and
products can be accessible to consumers in the entire world within a matter of days.43
Big-bang disrupters typically launch businesses without a foundation using cloud
computing, open platforms built on the internet, and fast-cycling mobile devices. Big-
bang disrupters often produce multiple new products to identify which products may take
hold in the market. While most such products will fail, the payoff associated with the
unconstrained growth of those products that succeed is substantial and facilitates and
often accelerates other forms of disruptive innovation.44
Big data is a significant driver of disruptive innovation. The idea of N=All,
facilitated by big data, allows researchers to understand correlations that are completely
unprecedented and to revolutionize our world.45 Big data in the form of digitized data
that grows at exponential rates and can be captured and manipulated electronically draws
on several core sources including the internet of things, public records, social media, and
cameras, as well as satellite tracking.46 Big data benefits not only industry and
researchers; it also increases consumer choice through publicly available websites
providing big data analyses intended to support consumers’ decision-making processes.
Despite the overwhelming benefits associated with big data, big data’s use of such
41 Downes & Nunes, supra note 38, at 46 (“The first key to survival is understanding that big-bang
disruptions differ from more-traditional innovations not just in degree but in kind. Besides being cheaper
than established offerings, they’re also more inventive and better integrated with other products and
services. And today many of them exploit consumers’ growing access to product information and ability to
contribute to and share it.”).
42 Steve Denning, The Business Disease With No Cure: Big Bang Disruption, FORBES (Feb. 22, 2014,
3:55PM), http://www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2014/02/22/the-business-disease-without-a-cure-big-
bang-disruption/ (“And, in today’s world of “near perfect market information” and social media, the best
quickly becomes a function of social consensus, not objective reality. That is why we say marketing’s main
function has shifted from selling to creating social consensus.”).
43 For instance, consumers downloaded an ad-supported version of a game called ”Angry Birds” over a
million times within the first 24 hours of its release. Seven months thereafter, consumers downloaded that
game more than 200 million times. Larry Downes & Paul Nunes, supra note 38, at 46.
44 Id. at 48 (“In the bizarro world of big-bang disrupters, it is perfectly rational to churn out dozens of new
products and see which ones take hold. Like venture capital investments, most will fail outright. But just
one success can pay off big.”).
45 KENNETH CUKIER & VIKTOR MAYER-SCHONBERGER, BIG DATA: A REVOLUTION THAT WILL
TRANSFORM HOW WE LIVE, WORK AND THINK (2013).
46 Id.; EXEC. OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, BIG DATA: SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES, PRESERVING VALUES (2014),
https://goo.gl/xtDerj (“Big data technologies, together with the sensors that ride on the “Internet of Things,”
pierce many spaces that were previously private. Signals from home WiFi networks reveal how many
people are in a room and where they are seated.”); James Manyika et al., Big Data: The Next Frontier for
Innovation, Competition, and Productivity 15 (McKinsey Global Institute Report May 2011),
http://goo.gl/GBzeLR (“We estimate that new data stored by enterprises exceeded 7 exabytes of data
globally in 2010 and that new data stored by consumers around the world that year exceeded an additional
6 exabytes. To put these very large numbers in context, the data that companies and individuals are
producing and storing is equivalent to filling more than 60,000 US Libraries of Congress. If all words
spoken by humans were digitized as text, they would total about 5 exabytes—less than the new data stored
by consumers in a year. The increasing volume and detail of information captured by enterprises, together
with the rise of multimedia, social media, and the Internet of Things will fuel exponential growth in data
for the foreseeable future.”).
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
disparate sources creates challenges for the integration of data and normalizing.47 The
literature mostly takes issue with the big data inaccuracies that occur when collecting
data from databases that merely require generalized accuracy.48 Big data are often not the
output of instruments designed to generate valid and reliable data suitable for scientific
analysis. Foundational data issues of construct validity, measurement, reliability, and data
dependencies are the same regardless of data quantities.49 Some critique the implicit
assumption of big data researchers that big data is a substitute for traditional data
collection and analysis rather than a mere supplement50 while others see big data and
small data not as mutually exclusive but as reinforcing and supporting each other.51 Big
data shortcomings can largely be addressed with artificial intelligence, and the
47 Id. at 12 (“To capture value from big data, organizations will have to deploy new technologies (e.g.,
storage, computing, and analytical software) and techniques (i.e., new types of analyses). The range of
technology challenges and the priorities set for tackling them will differ depending on the data maturity of
the institution. Legacy systems and incompatible standards and formats too often prevent the integration of
data and the more sophisticated analytics that create value from big data. New problems and growing
computing power will spur the development of new analytical techniques. There is also a need for ongoing
innovation in technologies and techniques that will help individuals and organizations to integrate, analyze,
visualize, and consume the growing torrent of big data.”); Christian Bizer et al., The Meaningful Use of Big
Data: Four Perspectives—Four Challenges, 40 ACM SIGMOD REC. 56, 57 (2012) (“My challenge is
meaningful data integration in the real, messy, often schema-less, and complex Big Data World of
databases and the (Semantic) Web using multi-disciplinary, multi-technology methods.”).
48 Id. at 57 (“The Web is an open medium in which everybody can publish data on the Web. As the classic
document Web, the Web of Data contains data that is outdated, conflicting, or intentionally wrong (SPAM).
Thus, one of the main challenges that Linked Data applications need to handle is to assess the quality of
Web data and determine the subset of the available data that should be treated as trustworthy.”); IAN
AYRES, SUPER CRUNCHERS: WHY THINKING-BY-NUMBERS IS THE NEW WAY TO BE SMART 60-63 (2007)
(identifying big data phenomenon); Andrea Lancichinetti et al., High-Reproducibility and High-Accuracy
Method for Automated Topic Classification, 5 PHYSICAL REV. X 011007 (2015)(detailing the inaccuracy
problems associated with big data text analysis/machine reading (called LDA)).
49 See David Lazer et al., The Parable of Google Flue: Traps in Big Data Analysis, 343 SCIENCE 1203
(2014); Gary Marcus & Ernest Davis, Eight (No, Nine!) Problems With Big Data, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 6,
2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/opinion/eight-no-nine-problems-with-big-data.html (“Reliable
statistical information can be compiled about common trigrams, precisely because they appear frequently.
But no existing body of data will ever be large enough to include all the trigrams that people might use,
because of the continuing inventiveness of language.”); Tim Harford, Big Data: Are We Making a Big
Mistake?, FIN. TIMES (Mar. 28, 2014), http://goo.gl/2dyox2 ("Statisticians have spent the past 200 years
figuring out what traps lie in wait when we try to understand the world through data. The data are bigger,
faster and cheaper these days – but we must not pretend that the traps have all been made safe. They have
not.”).
50 Jeff Leek, Why Big Data is in Trouble: They Forgot about Applied Statistics, SIMPLYSTATS (May 7,
2014), http://goo.gl/2dyox2 (“Statistical thinking has also been conspicuously absent from major public big
data efforts so far.”).
51 Lazer et al., supra note 49, at 1205 (“There is a tendency for big data research and more traditional
applied statistics to live in two different realms—aware of each other's existence but generally not very
trusting of each other. Big data offer enormous possibilities for understanding human interactions at a
societal scale, with rich spatial and temporal dynamics, and for detecting complex interactions and
nonlinearities among variables. We contend that these are the most exciting frontiers in studying human
behavior. However, traditional ‘small data’ often offer information that is not contained (or containable) in
big data, and the very factors that have enabled big data are enabling more traditional data collection. The
Internet has opened the way for improving standard surveys, experiments, and health reporting. Instead of
focusing on a ‘big data revolution,’ perhaps it is time we were focused on an ‘all data revolution,’ where we
recognize that the critical change in the world has been innovative analytics, using data from all traditional
and new sources, and providing a deeper, clearer understanding of our world.”).
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
combination of big data and artificial intelligence opens up significant additional big data
applications.52
Artificial intelligence (AI) presents another significant field of disruptive
innovation. AI is different from a regular computer algorithm. AI tries to emulate human
thought processes and rational human behavior through self-learning and storage of
experiences.53 Because it emulates human behavior, AI can act differently in the same
situations, depending on the actions previously performed. Many sectors of the economy
are already significantly affected by the rapid advances in AI during the past decade.54
The exponential development of AI and the associated disruptive innovation pose
52 Jo Ann S. Barefoot, Disrupting Fintech Law, 18 FINTECH L. REP., no. 2, 2015 at 6 (“Terms like ‘machine
learning, ‘deep learning,’ and ‘neural networks are entering the lexicon, referring to the fast-growing ability
of machines to gather and analyze vast volumes of information in ways, and at speeds, hitherto
unimaginable. …Computers today can take on a question or task; search all the digitized information in the
world; analyze what might be responsive to the goal; suggest possibilities; learn from feedback; and
endlessly improve results. In the medical realm, for instance, machines can diagnose cancer with accuracy
rivaling and surpassing that of human pathologists, and can ‘collaborate’ with humans to enhance the
outcomes that either could reach alone. Importantly, machines have ‘noticed’ things they were not even
asked to find, such as characteristics of tissue outside a malignancy, bringing such observations to the
attention of doctors who then have pursued new pathways of study and medical diagnosis. Computers can
conduct searches in seconds, hours, or days that would take humans hours, months, or even years to
execute. They efficiently synthesize images, data, and words, in any language, from across the globe, and
then present analysis and conclusions in conversational language and useful graphics.”); Daniel E. O’Leary,
Artificial Intelligence and Big Data, 28 IEEE INTELLIGENT SYS. 96, 97 (2013)(“AI researchers have long
been interested in building applications that analyze unstructured data, and in somehow categorizing or
structuring that data so that the resulting information can be used directly to understand a process or to
interface with other applications. As an example, Johan Bollen and Huina Mao8 found that stock market
predictions of the Dow Jones Industrial average were improved by considering the overall “sentiment” of
the stock market— this is an unstructured concept, but based on structured data generated from Google.”);
Maryam M. Najabadi et al., Deep Learning Applications and Challenges in Big Data Analytics, 2 J. BIG
DATA 11 (2015) (“[P]erforming discriminative tasks in Big Data Analytics one can use Deep Learning
algorithms to extract complicated nonlinear features from the raw data, and then use simple linear models
to perform discriminative tasks using the extracted features as input. This approach has two advantages: (1)
extracting features with Deep Learning adds nonlinearity to the data analysis, associating the discriminative
tasks closely to Artificial Intelligence, and (2) applying relatively simple linear analytical models on the
extracted features is more computationally efficient, which is important for Big Data Analytics.”).
53 Robert D. Hof, 10 Breakthrough Technologies 2013: Deep Learning, MIT TECH. REV. (Apr. 23, 2013),
http://www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/513696/deep-learning/ (“With massive amounts of
computational power, machines can now recognize objects and translate speech in real time. Artificial
intelligence is finally getting smart”); STUART RUSSELL & PETER NORVIG, ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: A
MODERN APPROACH 5 (2013) (describing the different major definitions for AI); Paulius Cerka et al.,
Liability for Damages Caused by Artificial Intelligence, 31 COMPUTER L. & SEC. REV. 376, 378 (2015)
(“This belief began to change due to constant improvement of computer systems. Intellect, i.e. the ability to
know, understand, and think, may not only be innate (natural), but also artificially created. AI is a broad
area that includes such subfields as: (i) natural language systems; (ii) machine learning; (iii) simulation of
senses; (iv)neural networks; (v) computer games; (vi) expert systems; and (vii) robotics.”).
54 Craig E. Karl, The Three Breakthroughts That Have Finally Unleashed AI on the World, WIRED (Oct. 27,
2014, 6:30AM), http://www.wired.com/2014/10/future-of-artificial-intelligence/ (“Over the past five years,
cheap computing, novel algorithms, and mountains of data have enabled new AI-based services that were
previously the domain of sci-fi and academic white papers. [Products such as the:] Self-Driving Car…Body
Tracker…Personal Photo Archivist…Universal Translator…Smarter News Feed”).
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
substantial challenges for policy makers in education, financial markets, labor markets,
and other areas.55
III. Venture Capital Impact on Innovation
The interdependent nature of venture capital investments and innovation is widely
recognized. Evidence exists that a productive and active venture capital industry boosts
innovation-based growth.56 Through selection of promising companies, financing,
collective learning, embedding, and signaling, VC firms can both interact with other
members of complex networks of innovation and support the robustness of that system.57
VC involvement in businesses helps lower information and opportunity costs and venture
capital networks support businesses in entering an industry and can create a virtuous
circle of new enterprise formation, innovation, and economic development.58 Studies
using patent rates almost universally suggest that venture capital has a positive effect on
innovation.59 Kortum and Lerner showed that venture capital is significantly more
effective at stimulating patents compared to corporate research and development
(R&D).60 Moreover, while high innovation ventures benefit most from venture capitalist
involvement,61 there is some evidence that VCs added most value to those ventures
already performing well.62
Despite the overwhelming evidence of a positive relationship between innovation
and VC, an emerging literature questions the relationship between VC and innovation,
using measures such as total factor productivity (TFP). Some suggest that older studies
on VCs interaction with patent rates misinterpreted the casual relationship, e.g. rather
than the VC creating the innovation, the money goes where the innovation is.63
55 ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON & ANDREW MCAFEE, THE SECOND MACHINE AGE: WORK, PROGRESS, AND
PROSPERITY IN A TIME OF BRILLIANT TECHNOLOGIES 205-228 (2014) (discussing policy in face of projected
automation of low-skill labor); Tess Townsend, Peter Diamandis: A.I. Will Lead to Massive Disruption
Across Industries, INC. (Sept. 24, 2015), http://www.inc.com/tess-townsend/diamandis-artificial-
intelligence.html (“He said self-driving cars will render car insurance and the need for more roads obsolete.
He anticipates his children will never drive. He projected that advances in camera technology will lead to
cameras woven into clothes, biometric sensing will “massively disrupt” medicine, and satellites will be able
to watch raw materials entering factories and finished products leaving them, enabling smart AI to extract
financial performance data ahead of the markets.”).
56 Christian Keuschnigg, Venture capital backed growth, 9 J. Econ. Growth 239 (2004).
57 Michael Ferrary & Mark Granovetter, The role of venture capital firms in Silicon Valley’s complex
innovation network, 38 Econ. & Soc’y 326 (2009).
58 Richard Florida & Martin Kenney, Venture capital and high technology entrepreneurship, 3 J. Bus.
Venturing 301 (1988).
59 CITE all
60 Samuel Kortum & Josh Lerner, Assessing the Contribution of Venture Capital to Innovation, 31 Rand J.
Econ. 674 (2000).
61 Harry J. Sapienza, When do venture capitalists add value?, 7 J. Bus. Venturing 9 (1992).
62 Harry J. Sapienza et al., Venture capitalist governance and value added in four countries, 11 J. Bus.
Venturing 439 (1996).
63 Masayuki Hirukawa & Masako Ueda, Venture Capital and Innovation: Which is First?, 16 Pacific Econ.
Rev. 421 (2011). (“Policy-makers typically interpret positive relations between venture capital (VC)
investments and innovations as evidence that VC investments stimulate innovation (VC-first hypothesis).
This interpretation is, however, one-sided because there may be a reverse causality that innovations induce
VC investments (innovation-first hypothesis): an arrival of new technology increases demand for VC. We
analyze this causality issue of VC and innovation in the US manufacturing industry using both total factor
productivity growth and patent counts as measures of innovation. We find that, consistent with the
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
IV. Disruptive Innovation as a Regulatory Challenge
Regulatory concerns associated with disruptive technologies will likely increase in
the coming years. Disruptive innovative technology often does not fit into existing legal
categories created by recalcitrant regulatory structures.64 Examples of existing regulatory
concerns that may be exacerbated by future developments include the possible hacking of
digital devices either to obtain information or to take control, the remote controlling of a
driverless car, the hacking of pacemakers of influential elites, the remote controlling of
an individual’s computer to demand a ransom, among many others.65 AI may not only
fundamentally challenge traditional employment law structures,66 AI and automation may
eventually play important roles in causing large dislocations in labor markets.67 In
finance, it remains unclear how to treat crowdfunding technology that allows firms and
innovation-first hypothesis, total factor productivity growth is often positively and significantly related with
future VC investment. We find little evidence that supports the VC-first hypothesis.”); Michael Peneder,
The impact of venture capital on innovation behavior and firm growth, 12 Venture Capital: Int’l J. of
Entrepreneurial Fin. 83 (2010)(“This paper uses a novel research design to investigate the effects of venture
capital financing on corporate performance by applying a two-stage propensity score matching on Austrian
micro-data. Controlling for differences in industry, location, legal status, size, age, credit rating, export and
innovation behaviour, the findings (i) assert the financing function of venture capital, showing that
recipients lacked access to satisfactory alternative sources of capital; (ii) identify selection effects, where
venture capital is invested in firms with high performance potential; and finally (iii) confirm the value
adding function in terms of a genuine causal impact of venture capital on firm growth, yet not on
innovation output.”); Stefano Caselli et al., Are venture capitalists a catalyst for innovation, 15 Euro. Fin.
Mgmt. 92 (2009); Bart Stuck & Michael Weingarten, How Venture Capital Thwarts Innovation, 42 IEEE
Spectrum 50 (2005).
64 For example, the question of how to categorize those that participate in the sharing economy into the
standard employee-independent contractor framework, how crowdfunding works with the regulatory
structure of private securities offerings or how cryptocurrencies (such as BitCoin) fit with regulatory
structure around currencies and bank reporting requirements. See Felix Salmon, When disruption meets
regulation, REUTERS (Jan. 30, 2014), http://blogs.reuters.com/felix-salmon/2014/01/30/when-disruption-
meets-regulation/; Balaji S. Srinivasan, Regulation, Disruption, and the Technologies of 2013 (Center for
Ethics and Entrepreneurship), http://goo.gl/sjZ3tF (providing an overview of the major conflicts between
the traditional regulatory structures and innovative disruptors, with quotes from Elon Musk, AirBnB
founders, other top entrepreneurs).
65 Mark Harris, Researcher Hacks Self-driving Car Sensors, IEEE SPECTRUM (Sept. 4, 2015, 19:00 GMT),
http://goo.gl/rrlnP6; Aarti Shanani, Ransomware: When Hackers Lock Your Files, To Pay Or Not To Pay,
NPR ALLTECHCONSIDERED (Dec. 8, 2014, 6:27AM ET), http://goo.gl/8Ybj8o; Tarun Wadhwa, Yes, You
Can Hack A Pacemaker (And Other Medical Devices Too), FORBES (Dec. 6, 2012 8:31AM),
http://goo.gl/oglPhS.
66 There are major issues of whether to classify uber and lyft drivers as independent contractors or
employees- Uber’s innovative model essentially requires them to be non-employees but many claim such
classification harms existing firms that have to comply with California’s extensive labor law requirements.
Berwick v. Uber Tech., Inc., Case No. 11-46739 EK, 2015 WL 4153765 (CA Dep’t of Labor Jun. 3, 2015)
(deciding Uber workers were indeed employees and Uber must comply with California labor law in this
regard). See also Mike Isaac & Natasha Singer, California Says Uber Driver is Employee, Not a
Contractor, N.Y. TIMES, Jun. 17, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/18/business/uber-contests-
california-labor-ruting-that-says-drivers-should-be-employees.html?_r=0.
67 John Komlos, Has Creative Destruction Become More Destructive? (NBER Working Paper No. 20379),
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20379 (suggesting that the creative destruction aspect of capitalism is being
amplified, especially in labor markets, by the exponential pace of technology).
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
individuals to raise money through bottom-up funding rather than traditional capital
markets.68 While acknowledging positive traits associated with crowdfunding technology,
many commentators are concerned about the possibility of fraud, the breakdown of
traditional protections for small investors, privacy violations, and intellectual property
issues.69
AI and its disruptive capabilities present significant regulatory challenges in the
existing regulatory framework. AI’s ability to accumulate and learn from experiences, to
make individual decisions, and to act without supervision creates the possibility of
causing damage to other technologies or humans. 70 Should AI unknowingly cause
damage, any forms of compensation would have to be addressed through existing legal
provisions in the existing regulatory framework. However, national and international law
do not (currently) recognize AI as a subject of law. Without legal personality, AI cannot
be personally liable for damages.71 With autonomous AI playing an expanding role in
society, an increasing number of scientists and entrepreneurs suggest that government
regulation may be necessary to reduce the risks to the public associated with the rapid
advances in AI.72 While some favor an indirect form of AI regulation based on
68 Thomas L. Hazen, Crowdfunding or Fraudfunding? Social Networks and the Securities Laws--Why the
Specially Tailored Exemption must be Conditioned on Meaningful Disclosure, 90 N.C. L. REV. 1735, 1736
(2012) (“Social networks have been used as a medium for financing films and other forms of art, as well as
for charitable solicitations. These and similar fundraising endeavors are known as crowdfunding.
Crowdfunding is the fundraising analog to crowdsourcing, which refers to mass collaboration efforts
through large numbers of people, generally using social media or the Internet.”).
69 See generally Id.; Letter from William F. Galvin, Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, to
Elizabeth M. Murphy, Secretary, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 1-2 (Aug. 8, 2012),
http://www.sec.gov/comments/jobs-title-iii/jobstitleiii-121.pdf (“Crowdfunding represents a significant
departure from long-established rules for public offerings of securities . . . Crowdfunding is designed to
permit the smallest investors to participate in securities offerings by early-stage companies. Our experience
is that these investors are especially vulnerable in the small-company segment of the market.”).
70 Cerka et al., supra note 53, at 376 (“The ability to accumulate experience and learn from it, as well as the
ability to act independently and make individual decisions, creates preconditions for damage. Factors
leading to the occurrence of damage identified in the article confirm that the operation of AI is based on the
pursuit of goals. This means that with its actions AI may cause damage for one reason or another; and thus
issues of compensation will have to be addressed in accordance with the existing legal provisions.”).
71 Id. (“In the absence of direct legal regulation of AI, we can apply article 12 of United Nations
Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts, which states that a person
(whether a natural person or a legal entity) on whose behalf a computer was programmed should ultimately
be responsible for any message generated by the machine. Such an interpretation complies with a general
rule that the principal of a tool is responsible for the results obtained by the use of that tool since the tool
has no independent volition of its own. So the concept of AI-as-Tool arises in the context of AI liability
issues, which means that in some cases vicarious and strict liability is applicable for AI actions.”).
72 Sharon Gaudin, A.I. Researchers Say Elon Musk’s Fears ‘Not Completely Crazy’, COMPUTERWORLD
(Oct. 29, 2014, 1:16PM PT), http://goo.gl/3K91LD (“I think we should be very careful about artificial
intelligence," Musk said when answering a question about the state of AI. "If I were to guess at what our
biggest existential threat is, it's probably that …With artificial intelligence, we are summoning the demon.
In all those stories with the guy with the pentagram and the holy water, and he's sure he can control the
demon. It doesn't work out.”); Rory Cellan-Jones, Stephen Hawking Warns Artificial Intelligence Could
End Mankind, BBC NEWS (Dec. 2, 2014), http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540 (“He told the
BBC: ‘The development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human race.’").
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
differential tort liability, 73 others oppose rigid regulation of AI because regulation may
inhibit the socially beneficial innovations associated with AI or suggest such regulation is
impossible in the face of such a powerful and exponentially growing technology.74 AI is
currently not able to match human-level reasoning,75 but it can still have an impact on the
service industries, among others.76
A regulatory response to disruptive innovation requires policymakers to balance
legitimate policy objectives such as consumer protection, privacy, and public welfare
while avoiding regulatory capture and policies that predominantly protect incumbent
firms. In the startup phase and before gaining substantial market share, disruptive firms
often create products or provide services that either do not fit into the existing regulatory
framework and the protections provided thereby, or such disruptive products and services
do not or do not fully comply with existing regulatory protections. In the latter case,
disruptive firms often argue that because of the unprecedented nature of the disruptive
product or service the existing rules do not or should not apply or compliance with the
existing rules is not necessary to protect the public because more appropriate consumer
protections are available through the disruptive firm.77 If disruptive firms do not comply
73 Matthew U. Scherer, Regulating Artificial Intelligence Systems: Risks, Challenges, Competencies, and
Strategies, 29 HARV. J. L. & TECH. (forthcoming 2016),
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2609777.
74 You, robot?, THE ECONOMIST (Sept. 1, 2012), http://www.economist.com/node/21560986 (“Regulators
must tread carefully. Noel Sharkey, a computer scientist at the University of Sheffield, observes that overly
rigid regulations might stifle innovation. But a lack of legal clarity leaves device-makers, doctors, patients
and insurers in the dark. The RoboLaw researchers hope to square this circle when they deliver their
findings in 2014. So far, though, they seem to have more questions than answers.”); John Danaher, Is
Regulation of Artificial Intelligence Possible?, H+ MAGAZINE (Jul. 15, 2015), http://goo.gl/vMw8et
(“Despite these worries, debates about the proper role of government regulation of AI have generally been
lacking. There are a number of explanations for this: law is nearly always playing catch-up when it comes
to technological advances; there is a decidedly anti-government libertarian bent to some of the leading
thinkers and developers of AI; and the technology itself would seem to elude traditional regulatory
structures.”).
75 Richard Waters, Artificial Intelligence: Machine v. Man, FIN. TIMES (Oct. 31, 2015),
http://goo.gl/8gaWQn (“Their effort is prompted by a fear of what will happen when computers match
humans in intelligence. At that point, humans would cede leadership in technological development, since
the machines would be capable of improving their own designs by themselves. And with the accelerating
pace of technological change, it wouldn’t be long before the capabilities – and goals – of the computers
would far surpass human understanding.”).
76 Harry Surden, Machine Learning and Law, 89 WASH. L. REV. 87, 88 (2014) (“In the last few decades,
researchers have successfully used machine learning to automate a variety of sophisticated tasks that were
previously presumed to require human cognition. These applications range from autonomous (i.e., self-
driving) cars, to automated language translation, prediction, speech recognition, and computer
vision. Researchers have also begun to apply these techniques in the context of law.”).
77 Benjamin G. Edelman & Damien Geradin, Efficiencies and Regulatory Shortcuts: How Should We
Regulate Companies like Airbnb and Uber? (Harv. Bus. Sch. Working Paper 16-026) at 2,
http://goo.gl/a0taVA (“We note that many platform operators advertise their services as “sharing.” For
example, short-term property rental service Airbnb says its service lets hosts “share . . . homes with guests”
while transportation service Lyft says it offers “ridesharing.” The term “sharing” partially captures some
aspects of these companies’ activities, e.g., employing a single resource for multiple purposes, such as
using a vehicle both for an owner’s personal needs and to transport paying passengers. Nonetheless, the key
efficiencies generally do not come from “sharing” but from the market structure that platforms facilitate,
including casual service providers who avoid the fixed cost and, often, regulation associated with
traditional service.”); Andy Kessler, The Weekend Interview with Brian Chesky: The ‘Sharing Economy’
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
with existing rules or create their own exemptions because the existing regulatory
framework does not apply and appropriate rules are not available, public policy goals
including consumer protection and public safety can be undermined and incumbent firms
that continue to be subject to existing rules encounter often severe competitive
disadvantages78. To counteract such disadvantages, incumbent firms that are exposed to a
perceived threat of disruptive innovation from disruptive firms may attempt to use the
existing regulatory process to create obstacles for disruptive firms to compete.
The anticipated level of innovation in the next thirty years79 makes it increasingly
less likely that rulemakers will be able to effectively protect the public while harnessing
innovation for the benefit of society. The combination of harm and possible benefits that
are associated with disruptive innovation can either equally affect both consumers and
providers or it can benefit a subset of consumers and providers while another subset
suffers adverse consequences; it can also create tradeoffs for subsets of providers and
consumers. As accelerating disruptive technology creates new complexity for society at a
rapidly accelerating pace, especially in significant growth areas such as robotics,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology,80 society increasingly struggles with analyzing the
wealth of new, beneficial, and ever more detailed information received from disruptive
technologies.81 The negative and positive impact of disruptive innovation will trigger
political and policy pressures for and against various regulatory responses to change. The
political system is, however, less likely to be able to deal with the challenges of
disruptive innovation because the increasing complexity of innovation-driven regulatory
issues causes political and policy makers’ confusion over rapidly-emerging disruptive
change, making a coherent political and policy solution to these challenges less likely.
The existing regulatory infrastructure cannot sufficiently distinguish and harness
beneficial innovation. Rulemakers’ inability to address regulatory issues associated with
disruptive innovation will likely generate high levels of legal uncertainty and
inconsistency82 that inhibit innovation during technological transition periods; and
and Its Enemies, WALL ST. J. (Jan. 17, 2014), http://www.wsj.com/articles/
SB10001424052702304049704579321001856708992 ([Uber cofounder Brain Chesky said of the current
regulatory structure]: “There were laws created for businesses, and there were laws for people. What the
sharing economy did was create a third category: people as businesses,” to which the application of existing
laws is often unclear.”).
78 See Edelman & Geradin, supra note 77, at 23 (“Most regulatory regimes require full service to
disfavored groups, including racial minorities, low-income users, and low-income regions. Software
platforms tend to circumvent these requirements, either through decentralized decision-making that favors
individual preferences over government mandates, or through software implementations that otherwise do
not require compliance.”).
79 See supra Fn. [_]-[_] and accompanying text.
80 See supra Fn. [_]-[_] and accompanying text.
81 John O. McGinnis, Accelerating Ai, 104 NW. U. L. REV. 1253, 1269 (2010) (“The problem now is that
the information available to be processed may be swelling beyond human capacity to achieve sound social
decisionmaking without the aid of AI.”).
82 Id. at 18 (“[United States has] five federal agencies that directly examine and supervise financial
institutions (Comptroller of the Currency, FDIC, Federal Reserve Board, CFPB, and National Credit Union
Administration (NCUA)). At least 20 federal agencies regulate some aspect of financial products, from
mortgages and student loans to retirement funds, and/or have enforcement mandates that include financial
services, as with the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the FTC. Much of this complexity is multiplied by
fifty at the state level, plus insurance products are almost entirely regulated by the states. . . . All or most of
these regulatory bodies have at least fragmentary responsibility relating to the broad, overarching consumer
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
technological transition is likely going to be a permanent state in the age of disruptive
innovation, which exacerbates the uncertainty and inconsistency created by rulemakers’
inability to react timely and adequately to disruptive innovation. In the existing
regulatory framework, regulators and commenters are engaged in a long, drawn out
feedback process that involves hearings, proposed rules, the submission of comment
letters, and finally agency lawyers finalizing a rule after considering the comments. The
current regulatory framework lacks a mechanism that succinctly and anticipatorily
informs rulemakers of beneficial innovative ideas. In fact, the existing rulemaking
process prohibits ex parte communications and insufficiently integrates brainstorming
and ideas across industries, and therefore may actually undermine innovation.
1. Ex Post Trial-and-Error Rulemaking
The ex-post trial-and-error-rulemaking in the existing regulatory framework83
often produces suboptimal regulatory outcomes that may no longer be sustainable as
disruptive innovation accelerates and causes unprecedented societal change. The ex-post
trial-and-error approach to rulemaking has functioned in the existing regulatory
framework because optimal rule requirements for rules do become clear when stable and
presumptively optimal rules emerge as suboptimal. A prerequisite for ex-post trial-and-
error rulemaking is thus the availability of the information on optimized rule
requirements. In an age of exponential innovation, that information may not materialize
at all or may not materialize in time for the trial-and-error rulemaking to be effective. In
other words, because trial-and-error rulemaking did not anticipate regulatory issues
created by innovation, rulemakers may not at all or much too late realize what new
regulatory demands apply to a given innovation and associated regulatory issue.
2. Stable and Presumptively Optimal Rules
The existing regulatory infrastructure, including Congress, regulatory agencies, self-
regulatory bodies, and the literature on regulation, relies almost exclusively on stable and
presumptively optimal rules.84 Such stable and presumptively optimal rules are created to
address perceived regulatory issues identified by lawmakers through centralized
information in the then existing economic and market conditions. Stable and
presumptively optimal rules are tailored and drafted to attain permanent solutions for
perceived regulatory issues that can be addressed with sufficient political support at the
time of drafting.85 The underlying conditions for rulemaking and the corresponding
requirements for optimal and stable rules are, however, subject to constant and ever
protection themes discussed above, such as privacy, data security, UDAP, fair lending, and the like. As
these and other regulatory standards shift and escalate under pressure from fast-changing technology, it
seems inevitable that the complexity of this structure will exacerbate uncertainty and inconsistency in
regulatory expectations, and will militate against modernization that might address problems efficiently and
serve consumers well.”).
83 Popper, supra note 8; Kirchner, supra note 11.
84 See Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 2 (“[T]he institutional infrastructure for rulemaking was geared
towards the creation of rules for governing a relatively stable society with less upward mobility and
relatively stable economic and market environments.”); Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in Liber
Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal & Lacine 2014, supra note 7.
85 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 8, 13.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
increasing amounts of change.86 The exponential growth of technology, the associated
exponential growth of innovation, and the resulting growth in the complexity of
regulatory issues will likely require ever increasing numbers of governance adjustments
via stable and presumptively optimal rules,87 making it increasingly less likely that
rulemakers will be able to effectively protect the public via stable and presumptively
optimal rules. If rulemakers cannot adequately protect their constituents, regulatory
supplements facilitating anticipatory rulemaking may be justified.
The existing regulatory infrastructure with stable rules and stable rulemaking
processes is subject to significant systemic constraints and path dependencies.
Historically, a comparatively small, stable, and less interconnected society with limited
upward mobility and relatively stable economic and market environments for rulemaking
created an institutional infrastructure for rulemaking that produces stable and
presumptively optimal rules to address a limited set of readily identifiable regulatory
issues.88 Because of the limited scope of regulatory issues and the need for consensus
driven institutional designs, the historically evolved infrastructure for rulemaking could
cope with its inherent collective action problems,89 regulatory cycles,90 and trial-and-error
rulemaking,91 without major disruptions. The exponential growth of technology and its
associated disruptive innovation92 are likely to expose the depth of issues related to the
path dependencies in the existing regulatory infrastructure and the associated design
flaws of the institutional infrastructure.
3. Timing
Timing of regulation in an environment of disruptive innovation should be a primary
concern for policy makers. If policy makers regulate too early, they risk inhibiting
innovation; if they withhold regulation too long, they may harm consumers and markets
if regulatory inertia has set in around the disruptive product or service. The time frame
for rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure may be inadequate to address
regulatory challenges associated with disruptive innovation. In the existing regulatory
86 Id.
87 MAEVE P. CAREY, R43056, COUNTING REGULATIONS: AN OVERVIEW OF RULEMAKING, TYPES OF
FEDERAL REGULATIONS, AND PAGES IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER 17 (2015) (“As the data show, the number
of pages has increased since publication of the Federal Register began. The number of pages reached a
peak in 1980 at 87,012 pages; decreased to 47,418 pages in 1986; then increased again and has been
approximately between 65,000 and 85,000 pages for the past two decades.”).
88 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 2-3 (“[T]he institutional infrastructure for rulemaking was geared
towards the creation of rules for governing a relatively stable society with less upward mobility and
relatively stable economic and market environments.”).
89 Coffee, supra note 9, at 1019-1082; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal Wake
Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Ostrom, supra note 9 (The predominance of
special interest groups in the rulemaking process can be temporarily overcome during and after crises when
political entrepreneurs assume the transaction costs of organizing the otherwise disinterested latent groups);
Olson, supra note 9 (Smaller and better-organized special interest groups typically control dispersed
investors and other dominant latent groups in the competition to influence the rulemaking process).
90 Coffee, supra note 9; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra
note 7.
91 Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Kirchner, supra
note 11 at 161-172; Popper, supra note 8.
92 See supra Fn. [_]-[_] and accompanying text.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
framework, regulators and commenters are engaged in a long, drawn out feedback
process that involves hearings, proposed rules, the submission of comment letters, and
finally agency lawyers finalizing a rule after considering the comments93. This existing
rulemaking process often prohibits ex parte communications,94 involves very little
brainstorming, and undermines innovation.95 While rulemakers may be able to update
regulations and regulatory guidance to address regulatory issues created by disruptive
innovation, given the exponential nature of disruptive innovation,96 they are less able to
adequately update existing rules in the present regulatory framework. The speed of
product innovation alone makes formal rulemaking in the existing regulatory
infrastructure challenging. Formal rulemaking is simply too time-consuming.97 The speed
of product innovation makes it possible to bring a new product to market while formal
rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure, taking months and often years of
regulatory procedure, is still dealing with the last product launch. New regulations
pertaining to an innovative product could be obsolete before they are finalized.98
93 Lynn E. Blais & Wendy E. Wagner, Emerging Science, Adaptive Regulation, and the Problem of
Rulemaking Ruts, 86 TEX. L. REV. 1701, 1706 (2008) (“[A]gencies systematically engage in excess data
gathering, protracted analysis of the data and associated public comments, and extraordinarily detailed
explanation of the bases and purposes of their final rules in an attempt to insulate their policies from
judicial reversal. . . . This hyperformalization of notice-and-comment rulemaking has several consequences.
The most obvious is the increase in time and resources required to promulgate each rule . . .”).
94 5 U.S.C. § 557(d)(1) (2012); Ex Parte Communications in Informal Rulemaking Proceedings
(Recommendation 77-3), 1 C.F.R. § 305.77 (2014) (listing other advantages associated with restraining ex
parte communications, including reducing possibility of unfair influence over decision makers and
affording interested parties opportunity to respond to information relied upon in decisionmaking process).
95 Peter H. Schuck, When the Exception Becomes the Rule: Regulatory Equity and the Formulation of
Energy Policy Through an Exceptions Process, 1984 DUKE L.J. 163, 197 (1984) (“Hastily prepared,
overbroad rules can be disastrous for those who technically are covered by the rules but to whom the rules
should not, in justice or sound policy, be applied. Inflexible application of such rules may quickly create
grave competitive distortions, perhaps even driving firms out of business before the rules can be refined or
eliminated.”); Blais & Wagner, supra note 93, at 1705 (“Important statutory directives remain
unimplemented years after the deadline for implementation has passed. Agencies are increasingly turning
to even more informal methods-- which lack adequate opportunities for public participation and evade
meaningful judicial oversight--to promulgate important policies. And, not surprisingly, agencies are
increasingly reluctant to revisit rules after enactment, even if the factual or policy predicates underlying
them have changed.”).
96 See supra Fn. [_]-[_] and accompanying text.
97 Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, 98 MICH. L. REV. 303, 371 (1999) (“With
respect to systematic effects: A great deal of attention has been paid to the phenomenon of the
“ossification” of notice-and-comment rulemaking, and indeed a high priority, for the future of
administrative law, is to devise means to overcome the problem. Originally intended as a quick and
effective alternative to formal, on-the-record rulemaking, executive and especially judicial innovations
have converted notice-and-comment rulemaking into an exceptionally time-consuming affair, often
consuming many years, frequently half a decade and more. In fact EPA estimates that informal rulemaking
typically takes five years.”); Thomas O. McGarity, Some Thoughts on "Deossifying" the Rulemaking
Process, 41 DUKE L.J. 1385, 1385 (1992) (“Although informal rulemaking is still an exceedingly effective
tool for eliciting public participation in administrative policymaking, it has not evolved into the flexible and
efficient process that its early supporters originally envisioned. During the last fifteen years the rulemaking
process has become increasingly rigid and burdensome.”).
98 Barefoot, supra note 52, at 10.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
4. Unknown Future Contingencies
The existing regulatory infrastructure with stable and presumptively optimal rules is
largely incapable of addressing the ever increasing unknown future contingencies
associated with disruptive innovation. Because it lacks anticipatory rulemaking
capabilities, the existing regulatory system addresses regulatory issues only ex-post, if
and when they materialize and if core constituents are sufficiently burdened to precipitate
enough political pressure for lawmakers to act.99 Evidence exists that the suboptimal ex-
post timing of rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure regularly requires
expedited rulemaking that results in suboptimal regulatory outcomes.100 Rulemakers
often discount or willingly accept the suboptimalities of rules associated with unknown
future contingencies. Temporary acceptance of suboptimal rules increases temporary rule
certainty and predictability, but it also precipitates the inevitable need for rule revision,
amendments, and repeals101 In the existing regulatory framework, if and when the
inevitable future contingencies materialize, unveiling suboptimal sets of existing rules,
rulemakers perpetuate a costly and uncertainty-increasing process of rule revisions,
amendments, and repeals to address such shortcomings. Despite its insufficient
anticipatory capabilities and all the downsides that are associated with it, stable and
presumptively optimal rules remain the uniform response to perceived regulatory
issues.102
Given the pace of innovation,103 future contingencies in rulemaking are likely to
substantially increase, making the dynamic anticipation of future contingencies more
important for rulemaking. The current process of rule revisions, amendments, and repeals
to address inevitable shortcomings of stable rules is costly, time-consuming, and cannot
in our estimation keep track of future innovations and corresponding regulatory needs.
Exponential innovation has the potential to overwhelm the existing regulatory process
because rulemakers are still attempting to comprehend the regulatory demands of the last
wave of innovative solutions, technologies, and applications while the next wave of
99 Id.; see also supra note 3.
100 Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Coffee, supra note 9; Roberta Romano, Regulating in the Dark 1 (Yale
Law & Econ. Research Paper No. 442, 2012), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1974148
(“Foundational financial legislation is typically adopted in the midst or aftermath of financial crises, when
an informed understanding of the causes of the crisis is not yet available. Moreover, financial institutions
operate in a dynamic environment of considerable uncertainty, such that legislation enacted even under the
best of circumstances can have perverse unintended consequences, and regulatory requirements correct for
an initial set of conditions can become inappropriate as economic and technological circumstances change.
Furthermore, the stickiness of the status quo in the U.S. political system renders it difficult to revise
legislation, even though there may be a consensus to do so.”); STEPHEN M. BAINBRIDGE, CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE AFTER THE FINANCIAL CRISIS 269 (2012) (“Just as a ratchet wrench works only in one
direction, the size and scope of government tends to move in only one direction—upwards—because the
interest groups that favored the changes now have an incentive to preserve the new status quo, as do the
bureaucrats who gained new powers and prestige. Hence, each crisis has the effect of ratcheting up the
long-term size and scope of government.”).
101 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 13 (describing “ex-ante experimentation” in rulemaking).
102 See Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal and
Lacine 2014, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7.
103 See supra Fn. [_]-[_] and accompanying text.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
innovation is already in full force.104 In effect, exponential innovation is likely to
intensify the frequencies of the regulatory sine curve that is recognized by the
literature.105
V. Dynamic Regulation as a Regulatory Supplement
Economists have used the concept of dynamic regulation in the context of innovation
and learning by doing,106 regulation of quality,107 principal-agent and adverse selection
problems,108 and continuing regulatory relationships.109 Dynamic elements in regulation
have previously also been described as “dynamic games,”110 “regulatory dialectic,” and
as a “dynamic adjustment process.”111 The rapid pace of technological developments in
the telecommunications industry necessitated the use of dynamic elements in
regulation.112
The theory of dynamic regulation conceptualizes the study of regulatory phenomena
in relation to preceding and succeeding events, using institution-specific and
decentralized information to facilitate feedback effects for anticipatory rulemaking.113
The dynamic regulatory framework allows rulemaking to overcome its historic
constraints and path dependencies that traditionally focused the rulemaking process on
stable and presumptively optimal rules. Evolving from a historically reactive process
based only on preceding events and driven by the agency- and collective-action problem
of rulemaking, rulemaking in a dynamic framework allows for the anticipation of future
104 Romano, supra note 100, at 1 (“Moreover, financial institutions operate in a dynamic environment of
considerable uncertainty, such that legislation enacted even under the best of circumstances can have
perverse unintended consequences, and regulatory requirements correct for an initial set of conditions can
become inappropriate as economic and technological circumstances change”); Shrupti Shah, Rachel Brody
& Nick Olson, The Regulatory of Tomorrow: Rulemaking and Enforcement in an Era of Exponential
Change, (Deloitte GovLab Report (2015)), http://dupress.com/articles/us-regulatory-agencies-and-
technology/ (“Regulators are on the front lines of nearly every controversy resulting from a new
technology—either being told to get out of the way or being called upon for solutions when incidents arise.
Data breaches, 3D-printed guns, clashes between taxis and ridesharing services, and many other events that
make news headlines also pose real challenges to regulators. In a fast-moving and increasingly complex
world, regulators are finding it harder and harder to balance the need to protect citizens and fair markets
with the need to avoid impeding innovation.”).
105 Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Coffee, supra note 9.
106 See Tracy R. Lewis & Huseyin Yildirim, Learning by Doing and Dynamic Regulation, 33 RAND J.
ECON. 22, 23–24 (2002) (“Innovation is more rapid when current service is increased, enabling the supplier
to accelerate his rate of learning.”).
107 Stephane Auray et al., Dynamic Regulation of Quality, 42 RAND J. ECON. 246, 246 (2011).
108 JOHN M. LITWACK, DYNAMIC REGULATION, DEMAND INFORMATION AND MARKET PRICES (1992).
109 David P. Baron & David Besanko, Commitment and Fairness in a Dynamic Regulatory Relationship, 54
REV. ECON. STUD. 413, 413 (1987); David P. Baron & David Besanko, Regulation and Information in a
Continuing Relationship, 1 INFO. ECON. & POL’Y 267, 267 (1984).
110 Edward J. Kane, Extracting Nontransparent Safety Net Subsidies by Strategically Expanding and
Contracting a Financial Institution’s Accounting Balance Sheet, 36 J. FIN. SERV. RES. 161, 161 (2009).
111 Edward J. Kane, Interaction of Financial and Regulatory Innovation, 78 AM. ECON. REV. 328, 333
(1988) (“The regulatory dialectic posits a dynamic adjustment process that in the long run enforces a "law
of one regulatory burden." Precisely because inefficient patterns of regulation impose excessively
burdensome costs either on regulatees, their customers, or the general taxpayer, the burdened parties must
be expected sooner or later to develop avoidance strategies by which to throw these burdens aside.”).
112 See supra note 16.
113 See Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal Wake
Forest, supra note 7; Kaal and Lacine 2014, supra note 7.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
innovation trends and associated contingencies.
Shortcomings in the existing rulemaking process114 can be addressed with dynamic
and anticipatory elements in rulemaking.115 The collective action problem of rulemaking,
problems associated with trial-and-error rulemaking, and problems associated with
regulatory cycles derive largely from the nature of stable and presumptively optimal
rules.116 Rulemaking with dynamic elements increases the use of institution specific,
decentralized, and timely information117 to allow for adaptive rulemaking. Adaptive
rulemaking helps overcome the collective action problem of rulemaking because with
fewer stable rules latent majority groups and dominant minority groups have fewer
opportunities to influence the continuously and timely adapting rulemaking process.
Similarly, regulatory cycles and trial-and-error rulemaking become less prevalent because
adaptive rulemaking processes supplement stable rules with adaptive capabilities that
make rule revisions less prevalent and minimize trial-and error rulemaking.
Feedback effects are an integral part of dynamic forms of regulation.118 Feedback
effects are described in the theory of lawmaking as rulemakers’ reactions to institutional
change119 or private actors’ reactions and counteractivities to institutional constraints.120
A dynamic regulatory framework facilitates feedback effects that help enhance the
availability of institution-specific and decentralized information to support the
rulemaking process.121 Feedback effects can occur in several settings including intra- and
interjurisdictional feedback processes, feedback processes between outcomes and
institutions, feedback processes between different public and private rulemakers, and
feedback processes between rules and rulemaking processes.122 Competition between
114 See supra notes 49-55.
115 Kaal Wake Forest, supra 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra 7.
116 The collective action problem of rulemaking, inherent in smaller and better-organized interest groups
and dominant latent groups competing to influence the rulemaking process, pervades when regulatory
outcomes are stable. Regulatory cycles, inherent in existing rule adoption, revisions, and revocations,
derive from stable and presumptively optimal rules that cannot timely adapt to future contingencies and
corresponding regulatory needs. Trial-and-error-rulemaking is necessitated if rules are presumptively
optimal and stable. Trial-and-error-rulemaking could become obsolete if dynamic elements in rulemaking
processes systematically anticipated future contingencies and corresponding regulatory needs.
117 Including information on the functioning of financial institutions, information pertaining to how
financial institutions, or decision makers in financial institutions, actually act and how they are expected to
react to unforeseen contingencies in the future helps incorporate dynamic elements into financial
regulation. Several mechanisms can increase the information for rulemaking in a more timely fashion,
including but not limited to: 1. Contingent Capital, 2. Governmental Contracts in the form of Non-and
Deferred Prosecution Agreements, 3. Venture Capital finance allocation, and 4. Crowdfunding. See supra
note 7.
118 See supra note 7.
119 Jean-Jacques Dethier, Governance and Economic Performance: A Survey 49 (Discussion Papers on
Development Policy No. 5, Center for Development Research, Bonn, April 1999), http://goo.gl/xzHwxK.
120 Christian Kirchner, Market Organizations: A New-Institutional Perspective, 151 J. INST. THEORETICAL
& ECON. 260, 265 (1995) (“By introducing various examples of the way in which private actors have tried
to escape the onerous results of regulation, and showing that law courts often have favoured such
"inventions," the paper developed a hypothesis of how public and private actors act and react in the
complex process of forming the institutional arrangements of market.”).
121 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 4 (“Rules can be adaptable if institutions and rulemaking processes
integrate dynamic elements that produce timely, relevant, and decentralized information for rulemaking.”).
122 Rules as outcomes are the result of the institutional design of rulemaking and reinforce the institutional
design. Existing rules create a feedback effect for the rulemaking process itself. Rules with suboptimal
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
legislators and regulators from different jurisdictions can facilitate interjurisdictional
feedback processes.123 The unrestricted exchange of information between public- and
private rulemakers can create regulatory synergies that increase the availability of
relevant, decentralized, and timely information for rulemaking124 and facilitate feedback
effects.125 Existing rules can provide feedback effects for the rulemaking process itself.126
Through feedback effects, rulemakers in a dynamic regulatory framework can adopt rules
that are adaptable to future states of the world.
Feedback processes in a dynamic regulatory framework facilitates the
enhancement of information for regulation. Dynamic regulatory tools as a regulatory
supplement enable rulemakers to adapt to regulatory contingencies if and when they arise
because feedback effect provides relevant, timely, decentralized, and institution-specific
information ex-ante. By increasing the availability of information ex-ante, dynamic
regulatory tools help lower unforeseen contingencies in the rulemaking process.
Improved information for rulemaking also helps maintaining certainty in the rulemaking
process.
characteristics are the results of institutional arrangements and reinforce suboptimal institutional
arrangements and rulemaking processes. Stable and presumptively optimal rules reinforce a rulemaking
process with an institutional structure that perpetuates stable elements in rules.
123 Including synergies and exchanges between public rulemakers and public regulators as well as
intrajurisdictional feedback processes between private and public rulemakers in a given jurisdiction.
Christian Kirchner et al., Regulatory Competition in EU Corporate Law After Inspire Art: Unbundling
Delaware’s Product For Europe, 2 EURO. COMPANY & FIN. L. REV. 159 (2015); Kirchner et al.,
Europäischer vs. US-amerikanischer Wettbewerb der Gesellschaftsrechte - Abschied vom alten Delaware-
Verbundprodukt. Die Aktiengesellschaf, 13 DIE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT 469 (2012).
124 Private rulemakers can have a comparative advantage over public rulemakers because, unlike their
public counterparts, they often can produce necessary, comparable, decentralized, and institution-specific
information for rulemaking. Unlike public rulemakers, private rulemakers often have access to
decentralized information and can more readily react to emerging, decentralized, and institution-specific
information. Interaction between public rulemakers and private rulemakers, including the exchange of
emerging information, creates a feedback process between them that increases the availability, timeliness,
and quality of information available to the public rulemaker. Based on the optimized information for
rulemaking, the public rulemaker can take regulatory action when the relevant information for rulemaking
becomes available. The interplay between public and private rulemakers and the associated feedback
process enables a learning process and optimization process for the public rulemaker.
125 Id. The rulemaking process is enhanced through the competition between private- and public rulemakers.
Competition between different public rulemakers can require public rulemakers to meet consumers’ and
legal addressees’ quality expectations and preferences. Consumer choice can add a dynamic element to the
rulemaking process because public rulemakers in a given jurisdiction can adjust rulemaking to consumer
choice once consumers have opted out of a suboptimal regulatory regime in that jurisdiction. Consumer
choice creates a feedback effect for the public rulemaker. Consumer choice can thus facilitate appropriate
information for rulemaking and enable anticipation and modification of the public rulemaker’s next action
in the rulemaking process. Feedback effects may exist between public rulemakers and parties who are
subject to informal rules if public rulemakers observe the preferences and efficient solutions of parties who
are subject to informal rules. In effect, parties who are subject to informal rules are signaling their
preferences and efficient solutions to the public rulemaker. Public rulemakers can benefit from the
additional insights such signaling may produce for the public rulemaking process.
126 The existing regulatory framework for optimal rules reinforces rulemaking processes that perpetuate
optimal rules, necessitating costly rule revision, updating, and revocation. Because of this feedback loop,
suboptimal existing rules and rulemaking processes rulemaking processes and institutions that produce
suboptimal outcomes.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Dynamic elements in rulemaking can help optimize the timing of rule enactment.
A core problem for most regulation is its inaccurate and delayed timing. Because of the
collective action problem of regulation, path dependencies, and political inertia, among
many other reasons, regulation is mostly reactive, following business cycles and not
preemptive, e.g. enacted before crises when governance improvements are most
needed.127 Instead of the traditional rule revisions ex-post after rules have emerged as
suboptimal, feedback effects in dynamic regulatory processes can increase the
availability of relevant information for rulemaking ex-ante and anticipate necessary
revisions before rules emerge as suboptimal.128 By identifying possible contingencies and
necessary rule revisions with optimized information ex-ante, dynamic regulatory
supplements make adaptive rulemaking the focal point for rulemaking in a dynamic
framework.129
Industries and regulatory agencies can benefit from dynamic regulation as a
regulatory supplement, an informal and flexible approach to regulatory issues. While the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA)130 institutes regulatory procedures to protect
regulated industries131 by requiring the full lawmaking process to apply,132 industries and
regulatory agencies often prefer unenforceable rules and no judicial involvement.133 Both
industries and regulators are affected by costly, untimely, overextended, and ossified
rulemaking or adjudicative procedures and the associated regulatory uncertainty.134
Dynamic regulatory supplements would not violate mandated regulatory procedures in
the APA135 as the full lawmaking process still applies.136 Dynamic regulation functions as
a regulatory supplement to help optimize the existing rulemaking process.
VI. Data
Venture capital’s assessment of innovative products and initiatives generates
institution- and industry specific decentralized information on innovation trends. To
illustrate venture capital’s ability to identify innovation trends, we use a PitchBook Data,
Inc. dataset on venture capital deals in the United States with 77,508 deals involving
37,298 companies from 2005 to 2015. The dataset comprises all VC deals including all
VC stages from 2005-2015 in the United States.
127 See supra text accompanying notes 70–72
128 Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7.
129 Id.
130 Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559, 701-706 (2012).
131 See 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559 (2012).
132 The APA requires that for a rule to become effective, the proposed rule must go through what is known
as a notice-comment rulemaking, often a lengthy process in which the public is given an opportunity to
comment on the proposed rule and the agency must consider such comments before promulgating a final
regulation. 5 U.S.C. § 553(b)(A) (2012).
133 Wu, supra note 22, at 1843 (“Both agency and industry will sometimes share an interest in an informal
and flexible regime that resembles an unenforceable “letter of intent” in the world of private contracts. The
costs of a slow-moving, ossified rulemaking or adjudicatory procedure, with its accompanying uncertainty
and litigation costs, fall on both industry and agency.”).
134 McGarity, supra note 97, at 1387-96.
135 Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559, 701-706 (2012).
136 The APA requires that for a rule to become effective, the proposed rule must go through what is known
as a notice-comment rulemaking, often a lengthy process in which the public is given an opportunity to
comment on the proposed rule and the agency must consider such comments before promulgating a final
regulation. 5 U.S.C. § 553(b)(A) (2012).
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
1. Capital Invested and Deal Count
Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction; Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All
Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: no filters
Capital Invested & Deal Count
$90.00B 14,000
12,870
$80.34B
$80.00B
11,099 $ 69.65B1 0,929 12,000
$70.00B
10,000
8,951
$60.00B
$50.00B $4 7 4 ,3 .5 2 5 4 B $45.25B 8,000
$41.38B
5,951
$40.00B $35.98B$ 36.78B 6,000
4,847 4,841 $32.41B
$28.76B 4,409 $27.74B
$30.00B
$23.64B 3,325 4,000
2,962
$20.00B
2,000
$10.00B
$0.00M 0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Total Capital Invested Deal Count
Figure [__]: VC TCimapeit aPle Irnivoeds t(e1d2 a nYde aDresa)l Count United StatSeso u2r0c0e5: -P2i0tc1Th5oB.to aDol kaC tDaasapetati t,a Iln cIn. vested
2005 $23.64B
comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies.
2006 $28.76B
2007 $35.98B
2. VC Investor2s0 08 $36.78B
2009 $27.74B
2010 $32.41B
2011 $44.55B
2012 $41.38B
2013 $45.25B
2014 $69.65B
2015 $80.34B
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction; Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All
Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: no filters
VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Total Capital Raised & Fund Count
$500.00B 755 800
689$ 442.10B6 97
$450.00B
700
618
$400.00B 600
568
600
539
$350.00B 523 521 521
$318.61B
482
$297.55B
$300.00B $284.37B $270.57B $279.57B 500
$250.00B 400
$202.91B $205.86B
$193.22B
$200.00B
$161.51B 300
$146.57B
$150.00B
200
$100.00B
100
$50.00B
17
$1.28B
$0.00M 0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Total Capital Raised Fund Count
Figure [__]: Total VC capital raised and VC fund countS Uounricteed: P SittcahteBso o2k0 0D5a-t2a0, I1n5c.. Dataset
comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies.
Time Period (12 Years) Total Capital Raised
2005 $202.91B
2006 $284.37B
2007 $442.10B
2008 $318.61B
2009 $193.22B
2010 $161.51B
2011 $146.57B
2012 $205.86B
2013 $270.57B
2014 $297.55B
2015 $279.57B
2016 $1.28B
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
25.00%
20.00%
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
-5.00%
-10.00%
Venture Capital
-15.00%
Venture Capital -
Early Stage
-20.00%
Venture Capital -
Later Stage
-25.00%
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Figure [__]: VC Fund IRR by VC Fund Type 2005-2015. Dataset consists of 6,157 VC
funds from 2005-2015.
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Search Criteria: Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Status: Completed; Deal Types: All VC
Stages; Deal Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: Fund Type: Angel Investor, Venture Capital, Venture Capital - Early Stage, Venture Capital -
Later Stage;
Fund Returns Chart Value 1: Average IRR Organized By: Fund Size Time Period: 11 Years Timeline Type: reportDate
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
0 - 99M
-5.00%
100M - 249M
250M - 499M
-10.00% 500M - 999M
1B - 4.99B
-15.00%
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Figure [__]: VC FFuunndd SIRizRe by VC Fund Size 2005-2015. Da2ta0s0e5t consists o2f0 60,6157 VC2 007
funds from 20050- 2- 09195M. -12.32% -2.84% -1.07%
100M - 249M -5.27% 0.16% 3.55%
250M - 499M -12.87% -5.53% -2.40%
500M - 999M -6.56% -5.06% -1.32%
1B - 4.99B -2.99% -4.20% 1.61%
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Table []: Contains the sector/industry allocations (both number of deals and deal size) for
the top 25 united states venture capital investors between years 2005 and 2015. Investors
include the following: Y Combinator, 500 Startups, Techstars, SV Angel, New Enterprise
Associates, Western Technology Investment, Intel Capital, Kleiner Perkins Caufield &
Byers, Sequoia Capital, Andreessen Horowitz, GV, Plug and Play Ventures, First Round
Capital, Accel Partners, Khosla Ventures, Draper Fisher Jurvetson, Individual Investors,
David McClure, Greylock Partners, MassChallenge, General Catalyst Partners, Lerer
Hippeau Ventures, Bessemer Venture Partners, National Science Foundations,
Lightspeed Venture Partners. Data provided by Pitchbook.
Add charts on LPs and Fund Types
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Average Number of Commitments to Top 25 U.S. VC Funds by Sector Focus
(2005-2015)
Wearables & Quantified Self
Security
SaaS
Robotics and Drones
Oncology
Nanotechnology
Mobile
Marketing Tech
Manufacturing
LOHAS & Wellness
Life Sciences
Internet of Things
Infrastructure
HealthTech
FinTech
EdTech
E-Commerce
CleanTech
Big Data
AdTech
3D Printing
Materials & Resources
IT
HC
Financial Services
Energy
B2C
B2B
- 0.50 1.00 1.50 2.00 2.50 3.00 3.50 4.00
Table []: Contains the average number of commitments to the Top 25 U.S. VC funds by
sector focus (Years 2005-2015). LPs in this dataset include the following: Adams Street
Partners, California Public Employees Retirement System, HarbourVest Partners, New
York State Common Retirement Fund, SBC Master Pension Trust, Pennsylvania State
Employees’ Retirement System, University of Texas Investment Management Company,
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, University of Michigan Endowment,
Massachusetts Pension Reserves Investment Trust, San Francisco Employees’ Retirement
System, Hewlett-Packard Master Trust, Alaska Retirement Management Board, Los
Angeles Fire and Police pension System, Alaska Permanent Fund, The Regents of the
University of California Endowment, Employees’ Retirement Plan of Duke University,
Iowa Public Employees’ Retirement System, Rockefeller Foundation, Mayo Pension Plan,
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, Employees’ Retirement System of the State of Hawaii,
BSS retirement Plan for Bargained Employees, Knightsbridge Advisers, BP Master Trust
for Employee Pension Plans.
3. Deal Characteristics
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction;
Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: no filters
VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Deal Count by Deal Type Value 1: Deal Count Organized By: Deal Type Time Period: 12 Years
14,000
Recapitaliza6on
12,000 Acquisi6on Financing
Restart - Corporate
10,000
Corporate
Grants
8,000
Equity for Service
Restart Later Stage VC
6,000
Restart Early Stage VC
Restart angel
4,000
Later stage VC
2,000 Early stage VC
Seed
Search Criteria0: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-20A1n5g; eDle al Option: Search on a fu ll transaction;
De2a0l 0Ty5p 2e0s0: 6A l2l 0V0C7 S 2t0a0ge8s 2; 0A0ll9 R 2o0u1n0d 2 N0u1m1 b2e0r1s2; A2l0l 1S3e r2ie0s1;4 L 2o0c1at5io ns: United States; Search HQ Only;
Pre/Accelerator/Incubator
Table Filters: no filters
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Figure [___]: V D C e d a e l a T l y c p o e unt and deal type United States 2005-2015. Dataset2 c0o0m5prises 2006
77,508 deals inPvroel/vAicncge 3le7ra,2to9r8/I nccoumbaptaonries. 23 22
Angel 136 188
Capita l Invested by VC Round Value 1: Total Capital Invested Organized By: VC Round Time Period: 12 Years
Seed 109 184
$90.00B Early stage VC 1 1 9 , t 6 h 5 R 0 ound 1,786
Later stage VC 942 1,017
18th Round
$80.00B Restart angel
17th Round
Restart Early Stage VC 1 2
16th Round
$70.00B Restart Later Stage VC 1 3
15th Round
Equity for Service
14th Round
$60.00B Grants 99 117
13th Round
Corporate 1 6
12th Round
$50.00B Restart - Corporate
11th Round
Acquisition Financing 9 8
10th Round
$40.00B Recapitalization 5 4
9th Round
8th Round
$30.00B
7th Round
6th Round
$20.00B
5th Round
4th Round
$10.00B
3rd Round
2nd Round
$0.00M
1st Round
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Angel
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 33
VC Round 2005 2006
Angel Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=$2279470.407M7 $348.4M
1st Round $5.27B $6.04B
2nd Round $5.97B $6.49B
3rd Round $4.91B $6.42B
4th Round $3.22B $3.67B
5th Round $2.13B $2.73B
6th Round $690.3M $1.89B
7th Round $396.9M $641.5M
8th Round $343.6M $95.2M
9th Round $282.2M $245.1M
10th Round $13.2M
11th Round $0.28M
12th Round
13th Round

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
FigSuearerc h[ _C_rit]e:r iVa:CD ecaal pStiatatuls i: nCvoemsptleedte db;y D VeaCl D raoteu: nFrdo mU:n 0i1t-eJdan S-2t0a0t5e,s T o2:0 301-5D-e2c0-210515. ;D Daeatal sOeptt ion: Search on a full transaction;
Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies.
Table Filters: no filters
4. Industries Represented
C apital Invested by Primary Industry Sector Value 1: Total Capital Invested Organized By: Primary Industry Sector Time Period: 12 Years
$90.00B
$80.00B
$70.00B
$60.00B Materials & Resources
Informa@on Technology
$50.00B
Healthcare
$40.00B
Financial Services
$30.00B Energy
B2C
$20.00B
B2B
$10.00B
Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction;
Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
$0.00M
Table Fil2te0rs0:5n 2o0 fi0lt6e r2s007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Figure [___]: VC capital invested by primary industry United States 2005-2015. Dataset
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies.
Capital InvesPtreimda bryy InIndduustsrytr Sye Vcteorrtical 20V0a5lue 1: Tot2a0l 0C6apital Invested Organized By: Industry Vertical Time Period: 12 Years
B2B $2.29B $2.95B
$120.00B B2C $1.73B $2.62B
Energy Wear$ab3l7es3 .&8 MQuan;fied S$e1lf. 54B
Financial Services $519.8M $379.1M
Security
$100.00B Healthcare $6.96B $8.41B
Information Technology SaaS $11.46B $12.70B
Materials & Resources $319.5M $148.5M
Robo;cs and Drones
$80.00B $23.64B $28.74B
Oncology
Nano-technology
$60.00B
Mobile
Marke;ng Tech
$40.00B
Manufacturing
LOHAS & Wellness
$20.00B
Life Sciences
Internet of Things
$0.00M
Infrastructure
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
HealthTech
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Figure [__]: VC capital invested by industry vertical United States 2005-2015. Dataset
Industry Vertical 2005 2006
comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies.
3D Printing $4.0M $0.20M
AdTech $343.0M $698.3M
Big Data $204.8M $403.2M
CleanTech $559.6M $1.47B
E-Commerce $654.3M $658.9M
EdTech $51.8M $71.6M
Fin Tech $240.9M $346.5M
HealthTech $171.3M $236.5M
Infrastructure $29.5M $157.4M
Internet of Things $380.4M $401.7M
Life Sciences $3.73B $4.08B
LOHAS & Wellness $210.4M $461.3M
Manufacturing $2.71B $3.72B
Marketing Tech $394.8M $435.9M
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction;
Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: no filters
VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Median Deal Size by Industry Vertical Value 1: Median Deal Size Organized By: Industry Vertical Time Period: 12 Years
$120.0M
Wearables & Quan:fied Se lf
Security
$100.0M
SaaS
Robo:cs and Drones
$80.0M
Oncology
Nano-technology
$60.0M
Mobile
Marke:ng Tech
$40.0M
Manufacturing
LOHAS & Wellness
$20.0M
Life Sciences
Internet of Things
$0.00M
Infrastructure
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
HealthTech
Figure [___]: Median VC deal size by industry vertical United State 2005-2015. Dataset
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies.
Industry Vertical 2005 2006
3D Printing $4.0M $0.20M
AdTech $4.5M $4.0M
Big Data $5.1M $5.0M
CleanTech $3.2M $6.0M
E-Commerce $3.7M $5.0M
EdTech $1.6M $2.1M
Fin Tech $4.2M $5.2M
HealthTech $2.5M $2.8M
Infrastructure $2.6M $6.6M
Internet of Things $7.6M $6.0M
Life Sciences $4.9M $4.5M
LOHAS & Wellness $6.0M $5.4M
Manufacturing $4.9M $5.0M
Marketing Tech $5.6M $3.0M
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
5. Investment Ratio by Industry
Industry Totals
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 All
3D Prin<ng AdTech
BigData CleanTech
E-Commerce EdTech
FinTech HealthTech
Infrastructure Internet of Things
Life Sciences LOHAS & Wellness
Manufacturing Marke<ng Tech
Mobile Nano-technology
Oncology Robo<cs and Drones
SaaS Security
Wearables & Quan<fied Self
Figure [__]: VC Investment ratio by industry. The investment ratio is calculated as VC
investment amount divided by VC deals per year and industry. Dataset comprises 77,508
deals involving 37,298 companies.
Figure [___]: VC deal type ratios by industry 2005-2015. Data provided by
PitchBook. PitchBook provides the VC investments for the following periods/stages:
Pre/Accelerator/Incubator, Angel, Seed, Early Seed VC, Later Stage VC, Restart Angel,
Restart Early Stage, and Restart Late Stage. Pitchbook provides data for the following
industries: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data, CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech, Fin Tech,
Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences, LOHAS and Wellness,
Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security and
Wearables. The data runs from 2005 through 2015. The following ratios are calculated by
dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the cumulative deals between 2005
through 2015.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Figure [__]: VC Deal type ratios by industry vertical 2005-2015. Data provided by
PitchBook. PitchBook provides the VC investments for the following periods/stages:
Pre/Accelerator/Incubator, Angel, Seed, Early Seed VC, Later Stage VC, Restart Angel,
Restart Early Stage, and Restart Late Stage. Pitchbook provides data for the following
industries: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data, CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech, Fin Tech,
Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences, LOHAS and Wellness,
Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security and
Wearables. The data runs from 2005 through 2015. The following ratios are calculated by
dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the cumulative deals between 2005
through 2015.
6. Innovation Sustainability
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Figure [__]: Data provided by PitchBook. PitchBook provides the VC investments for
the following periods/stages: Seed, Series A, Series B, Series C, Series D, Series E,
Series F, Series G, Series H, Series I, Series J, and Series K. Pitchbook provides data for
the following industries: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data, CleanTech, E-Commerce,
EdTech, Fin Tech, Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences,
LOHAS and Wellness, Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics,
SaaS, Security and Wearables. The data runs from 2005 through 2015. The following
ratios are calculated by dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the cumulative
deals between 2005 through 2015.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Figure [_]: Data provided by PitchBook. PitchBook provides the VC investments for the
following periods/stages: Seed, Series A, Series B, Series C, Series D, Series E, Series F,
Series G, Series H, Series I, Series J, and Series K. Pitchbook provides data for the
following industries: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data, CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech,
Fin Tech, Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences, LOHAS and
Wellness, Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security
and Wearables. The data runs from 2005 through 2015. The following ratios are
calculated by dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the cumulative deals
between 2005 through 2015.
Figure [__]: VC deal / dollar investment ratios stage/series by industry vertical from
2005-2015. Data provided by PitchBook. PitchBook provides the VC investments for the
following periods/stages: Seed, Series A, Series B, Series C, Series D, Series E, Series F,
Series G, Series H, Series I, Series J, and Series K. Pitchbook provides data for the
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
following industries: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data, CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech,
Fin Tech, Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences, LOHAS and
Wellness, Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security
and Wearables. The data runs from 2005 through 2015. The following ratios are
calculated by dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the cumulative deals
between 2005 through 2015.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Company Industry Current Deal Date % Acquired VC Series Total Year
Name Vertical Financing Round Invested Founded
Status Equity
Palantir Big Data, SaaS Venture 12/13/2015 4.29 12th Series K 880 2004
Technologies Capital-Backed Round
Palantir Big Data, SaaS Venture 11/3/2014 6.91 10th Series I 635.71 2004
Technologies Capital-Backed Round
Palantir Big Data, SaaS Venture 11/26/2014 0.33 11th Series J 400 2004
Technologies Capital-Backed Round
Motricity Mobile Corporate 12/31/2007 20.11 9th Round Series I 185 2001
Backed or
Acquired
Onconova Life Sciences, Private Equity- 8/10/2012 10th Series J 50 1998
Therapeutics Oncology Backed Round
(ONTX)
Tocagen Life Sciences, Venture 10/21/2015 12.98 9th Round Series H 46.2 2007
Oncology Capital-Backed
TherOx Life Sciences Venture 7/21/2005 58.68 9th Round Series I 40.8 1994
Capital-Backed
Revolution Venture 11/19/2015 11.85 12th Series I 35.22 2006
Foods Capital-Backed Round
Alien Internet of Venture 3/12/2007 15.55 12th Series I 33 1994
Technology Things, Capital-Backed Round
Manufacturing
OptiScan Venture 4/14/2010 11th Series I 31.5 1994
Biomedical Capital-Backed Round
BioNumerik Life Sciences, Private Equity- 3/12/2009 10th Series K 30 1995
Pharmaceuticals Oncology Backed Round
TherOx Life Sciences Venture 2/20/2008 28.33 10th Series J 29.99 1994
Capital-Backed Round
Alien Internet of Venture 3/12/2007 15.89 11th Series I 28.47 1994
Technology Things, Capital-Backed Round
Manufacturing
Onconova Life Sciences, Private Equity- 7/18/2012 9th Round Series I 26.44 1998
Therapeutics Oncology Backed
(ONTX)
Allconnect Venture 2/21/2007 10.08 11th Series I 20 1998
Capital-Backed Round
NeuroPace Life Sciences, Venture 7/8/2013 3.91 6th Round Series I 18.05 1997
LOHAS & Capital-Backed
Wellness
AFS Private Equity- 8/29/2008 3rd Round Series I 13 1985
Technologies Backed
Agraquest Life Sciences, Formerly VC- 1/1/2009 11.32 13th Series J 10.2 1995
Manufacturing Backed Round
Agraquest Life Sciences, Formerly VC- 6/18/2009 6.56 12th Series I 10.13 1995
Manufacturing Backed Round
CafePress E-Commerce Venture 11/24/2008 1.39 3rd Round Series I 8.3 1999
(PRSS) Capital-Backed
Agraquest Life Sciences, Formerly VC- 3/25/2011 6.89 14th Series K 7.5 1995
Manufacturing Backed Round
Exa (EXA) Formerly VC- 5/21/2008 5.79 8th Round Series I 6 1991
Backed
Iconix Manufacturing Venture 1/24/2007 3.95 10th Series I 4 1997
Biosciences Capital-Backed Round
Iconix Manufacturing Venture 12/18/2006 2.06 9th Round Series I 2 1997
Biosciences Capital-Backed
OptiScan Venture 7/2/2010 12th Series J 0.7 1994
Biomedical Capital-Backed Round
Table 1: Top 25 companies by highest VC series investment.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Search Criteria: Exit Status: Completed; Include VC-Backed Exit; Exit Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Locations: United
States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: no filters
Capital Invested by Exit Type Value 1: Total Capital Invested Organized By: Exit Type Time Period: 12 Years
7. Exit
$140.00B
Bankruptcy: Liquida>on
$120.00B
Distribu>on
Share Repurchase
$100.00B
Dividend Recapitaliza>on
$80.00B
Reverse Merger
Merger of Equals
$60.00B
Merger/Acquisi>on
$40.00B Investor Buyout by Mgt.
Secondary Buyout
$20.00B
Buyout
$0.00M Secondary Offering
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
IPO
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Figure [__]: VC capital invested by exit type. Database comprises 9,526 United States
companies that exited after VC capital investment from 2005-2015.
Exit Type 2005 2006
IPO $2.86B $3.89B
Secondary Offering $1.15B $780.9M
Buyout $1.16B $1.21B
Secondary Buyout $25.0M
Investor Buyout by Mgt.
Merger/Acquisition $20.36B $27.80B
Draft Date: JanMuaerryg e2r, o2f0 E1q6u als 42
Reverse Merger
DivEidleecntrdo Rniecc caoppitya liazvaatiiolanble at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477
Share Repurchase $57.5M
Distribution
Bankruptcy: Liquidation
$25.53B $33.76B

Search Criteria: Exit Status: Completed; Include VC-Backed Exit; Exit Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Locations: United
States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: no filters
VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Deal Count by Exit Type Value 1: Deal Count Organized By: Exit Type Time Period: 12 Years
1,600
Bankruptcy: Admin/Reorg
1,400
Bankruptcy: LiquidaCon
1,200
DistribuCon
Share Repurchase
1,000
Dividend RecapitalizaCon
800 Reverse Merger
Merger of Equals
600
Merger/AcquisiCon
400 Investor Buyout by Mgt.
Secondary Buyout
200
Buyout
Secondary Offering
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 IPO
Figure [__]: VC deal count by exit type. Database comprises 9,526 United States
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
companies Ethxaitt Teyxpiteed after VC deals from 2005-2015. 2005 2006
IPO 45 57
Secondary Offering 13 13
Buyout 32 47
Secondary Buyout 3
Investor Buyout by Mgt.
Merger/Acquisition 349 402
identify:
Merger of Equals 12 6
Ipo exit by industry by year (which industries have seen the most IPO exits from
Reverse Merger 1 1
2005-2015?)
Dividend Recapitalization
Share Repurchase 1
Distribution
Bankruptcy: Liquidation 42 36
Bankruptcy: Admin/Reorg 6 6
500 572
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Figure [__]: VC deals 2005-2015 with IPO exit by industry vertical. 647 VC deals
ended in IPO exit from 2005-2015.
IPO Exits
250
200
150
100
50
Figure [__]: Top 20 Industries by IPO exit. 647 VC deals ended in IPO exit from
2005-2015.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Bankruptcy Deal Count
300
250
200
150
100
50
Figure [__]: VC deals 2005-2015 with Bankruptcy exit by industry vertical. 1890 VC
deals ended in Bankruptcy exit from 2005-2015.
Figure [__]: Top 20 Industries by VC bankruptcy exit. 1890 VC deals total ended in
Bankruptcy exit from 2005-2015.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Company Name Industry Vertical Deal Date Deal Size Pre Post Total Year Financing
Valuation Valuatio Invested Founde Status
n Equity d
Facebook (FB) SaaS 5/12 16006.88 72080.35 81247.23 6764.76 2004 Formerly VC-
Backed
Twitter (TWTR) Mobile 11/13 1820 12342.12 14162.12 1760.85 2007 Formerly VC-
Backed
Interactive Brokers 5/07 1200.4 6.03 1206.43 1177.89 1977 Formerly VC-
Group Backed
Zynga Mobile 12/11 1000 5993.43 6993.43 967.5 2007 Venture
Capital-
Backed
VMware SaaS 8/07 957 9921.48 1087.85 904.37 1998 Formerly VC-
Backed
Lending Club (LC) E-Commerce, FinTech 12/14 870 4551.09 5421.09 711.12 2007 Formerly VC-
Backed
WEX 2/05 720 4.84 724.84 684 1983 Formerly VC-
Backed
Groupon (GRPN) 11/11 700 12056.07 12756.07 658 2008 Venture
Capital-
Backed
Blue Buffalo Pet Manufacturing 7/15 677.35 3244.06 3921.41 641.11 2002 Private Equity-
Products (BUFF) Backed
Workday (WDAY) FinTech, SaaS 10/12 637 3851.12 4488.12 598.78 2005 Formerly VC-
Backed
ClearWire Mobile 3/07 600 3448.05 4048.05 564 1998 Formerly VC-
Backed
Vonage (VG) 5/06 531.25 2116.2 2647.45 499.38 2001 Formerly VC-
Backed
Fitbit (FIT) LOHAS & Wellness, Mobile, 6/15 731.5 3382.94 4114.44 447.75 2007 Formerly VC-
Wearables & Quantified Self Backed
WhiteWave Foods Manufacturing 10/12 391 2550 2941 367.54 Formerly VC-
Backed
A123 Systems CleanTech, Manufacturing, 9/09 380.44 954.19 1325.44 345.26 2001 Venture
Nanotechnology Capital-
Backed
Wayfair (W) E-Commerce, SaaS 10/14 366.85 2080.97 2399.97 286.23 2002 Venture
Capital-
Backed
FireEye (FEYE) SaaS, Security 9/13 349 2394.92 282.26 2004 Formerly VC-
Backed
SunRun (RUN) CleanTech, LOHAS & 8/15 251 1107.03 1357.63 251 2007 Formerly VC-
Wellness Backed
Juno Therapeutics Life Sciences, Oncology 12/14 264.55 1605.99 1870.54 246.03 2013 Formerly VC-
(JUNO) Backed
Square (SQ) FinTech, Mobile, SaaS 11/15 243 2708.5 2951.5 218.15 2009 Formerly VC-
Backed
Arista Networks 6/14 225.75 2508.29 2734.04 212.21 2004 Formerly VC-
(ANET) Backed
Masimo Manufacturing 8/07 202.58 695.3 897.89 202.58 1989 Formerly VC-
Backed
Hudson Pacific 6/10 217.6 127.45 345.05 202.37 2009 Formerly VC-
Properties (HPP) Backed
LinkedIn Mobile 5/11 352.8 4035.19 4252.44 202.04 2003 Venture
Capital-
Backed
GoPro (GPRO) Manufacturing 6/14 427 2528.37 2955.37 200.78 2003 Corporation
Etsy (ETSY) E-Commerce 4/15 266.67 1508.73 1775.4 199.47 2005 Formerly VC-
Backed
Table 2: Top 25 companies by IPO exit.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
Limited partners by industry by year (which are the most active/highest investment
limited partners by industry from 2005-2015?)
Most active investors by industry by year (which are the most active/highest
investment for investors/funds by industry from 2005-2015?)
For this dataset: https://my.pitchbook.com/?pcc=14688-37
Narrower description:
1) IPO exits by industry by year 2) Bankruptcy by industry by year 3) Top LPs
commiting to Funds by Industry Preferences (of the funds) by year (number of
commitments 4) Top Investors by industry by year (number of deals)
Discuss particular companies and products once we see which industries got the
most series.
Pending:
1) Averages of LP commitments by industry and by industry vertical for the top 25 LPs
from 2005-2015. Graph for each industry and vertical + overall, as you requested. 2)
Averages (both number of deals and by dollar investments) for the top 25 Investors by
industry and industry vertical from 2005-2015. Graph for each industry and vertical +
overall, as you requested.
VII. Venture Capital as Dynamic Regulation of Disruptive Innovation
The data analysis shows that venture capitalists’ finance allocation and the
implicit assessment of innovative products, businesses, and initiatives generates highly
relevant institution- and industry-specific decentralized information on innovation trends.
As such, venture capitalists’ innovation driven finance allocation can provide feedback
on innovation trends for rulemakers, optimize the timing of regulation, and facilitate
anticipatory rulemaking. Venture capitalists’ investment allocations can provide
rulemakers with a measure of risks associated with innovative developments as well as
the economic opportunities associated with such innovation.
VC finance allocation can create feedback effects for dynamic regulation of
innovation. The theory of lawmaking describes feedback effects as rulemakers’ reactions
to institutional change or private actors’ reactions and counteractivities to institutional
constraints. Kaal & Vermeulen show that data on VC finance allocation can distill
institutional changes of companies that received VC financing in minute details. As such,
the regulators’ reaction to institutional change could be informed by VC financing
allocations. VC feedback effects provide relevant, timely, decentralized, and institution-
specific information ex-ante.
VC’s finance allocation can help optimize the timing of rule enactment. A core
problem for regulation of disruptive innovation is inaccurate and delayed timing.
Regulation is mostly reactive, following business cycles, and not preemptive. Data on VC
investments allows regulators to see where innovation trends exist and what possible
risks are entailed before disruptive innovation materializes. Should regulators take such
data on VC investments and their possible implications for disruptive innovation
seriously and integrate them in rulemaking processes or legislative proposals, it is
conceivable that the identification of disruptive innovation and associated legal concerns
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
could be addressed in a more timely fashion. By identifying possible contingencies and
necessary rule revisions with optimized information from VC investments ex-ante, before
disruptive innovation creates problems, regulators could anticipate regulatory needs.
Venture capitalists’ innovation driven finance allocation can facilitate anticipatory
rulemaking. Through the feedback effects that are facilitated by venture capitalists’
finance allocation towards innovative products, rulemakers can obtain timely and
decentralized industry specific and entity specific information that allows them to adapt
rules to anticipate regulatory issues. For instance, information on industry-specific VC
investments allows regulators to anticipate regulatory needs in certain industries that are
associated with the highest levels of disruptive innovation. Disruptive innovation may
here be quantified with the VC dollar investment in such industries. Kaal & Vermeulen
are examining multiple metrics with VC investment information. The broad data on VC
investments allows for a detailed analysis of innovation trends with anticipatory qualities
that could be directly utilized by regulators.
Venture capitalists’ investment allocations can provide rulemakers with a measure of
risks associated with innovative developments. [_________]
Venture capitalists’ investment allocations can provide rulemakers with a measure of the
economic opportunities associated with such innovation. [_________]
Venture capitalists’ investment allocations can provide rulemakers with a measure
of risks associated with innovative developments as well as the economic opportunities
associated with such innovation.
Critics may suggest that the market often undervalues venture capital financed
innovation in products and ideas. The authors realize that a trend for venture capital
financed technology companies, among others, to stay private137 and market
undervaluation of formerly venture capital financed companies138 suggest that the
innovation potential identified by venture capital finance allocation may not always be
shared by the market at large. However, our objective in this article is not to discuss the
long-term potential of venture capital financed innovation. Rather, we suggest that
venture capitalists’ innovation driven finance allocation can provide feedback for
rulemakers, optimize the timing of regulation, and facilitate anticipatory rulemaking.
Critics may also suggest that venture capital financed innovation is not a reliable
measure of innovation that requires regulatory action. [____]
VIII. Conclusion
VC has outrun regulation and regulation is too slow to react, hurting the process. [Just
like drone regulation is too slow] The notice and comment procedures of the APA and
137 Nicole Bullock, Gavin Jackson & Jennifer Hughes, Global Listings Drop as Tech Groups Stay Private,
Financial Times, 2/3 January 2016 at 9.
138 CITE Examples.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION
SEC are too slow; moreover the micromanagement of the markets is overdone by the
SEC and, being outdated, is slowing down vc.
Draft Date: January 2, 2016 49
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2740477

