How Decentralized Autonomous Organizations Optimize Charitable Giving
December, 2021
By
Wulf Kaal1
Abstract
Charitable giving in legacy systems is subject to several major downsides that can be addressed
with decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs). Centralized legacy charitable organization
often lack foundational transparency and are subject to significant power imbalances that favor the
donor and lead to centralization of the charity. Existing legal incentives often lead to so called
Zombie Charities in many jurisdictions. The donative intent can therefore often not be optimally
fulfilled. DAOs combine unique feedback loops and transparency features with community
governance that address the existing shortcomings of charitable organizations in centralized
structures.
Key Words: Common Good, Charity, Decentralized Autonomous Organization, Finance, Token
Models, Cryptocurrencies, Feedback Effects, Emerging Technology, Tokens, Blockchain,
Distributed Ledger Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
1 The Author is grateful to many colleagues and members of the web3 community who provided valuable feedback.
The author would especially like to thank Josh Bykowski, Timothy Behrsin, as well as [_____].
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Table of Contents
Background 4
Motivation 9
Flaws in Charitable Giving 9
Lack of Transparency 9
Power Imbalances 11
Legal Incentives Undermine Effective Giving 12
Tax Free Cash Hoarding 13
Legal Barriers to Cross-Border Philanthropy 13
Outflow Constraints 13
Inflow Constraints 14
Proposed Solutions 16
Increased Regulatory Oversight 16
Harness Technology 17
CHARITYxDAO 18
Fixing Charitable Giving 19
Increasing Transparency 19
Equity 20
Incentive Optimization 21
Foundational Beliefs 22
Engaging the Donor 23
Seeding Charity Purpose 23
Public Monitoring 23
Endowment Allocation 24
Donor Marjority Reputation Stake 24
Governance 25
Key features 25
Reputation Staking for the Common Good 27
Slashing Reputation 29
Community Audits 29
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Onboarding 30
Conclusion 32
Bibliography 32
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Background
The 21st century has witnessed a remarkable increase in philanthropic engagements. Over a
century ago, in 1911, Andrew Carnegie applied for and was granted a charter to create the Carnegie
Foundation, the first foundation of its kind.2 Other wealthy Americans, like John D. Rockefeller,
followed suit.3 Other nations quickly followed suit. For example, in the last 20 years the number
of private foundations in Brazil increased by 300%, resulting in 5.5 billion USD donated within
the same time frame (1991-2011).4 India’s philanthropy exceeded 5 billion USD in 2006 alone; in
China, over 800 private foundations were established between 2006 and 2011.5 From a global
perspective, the flow of private philanthropy from OECD nations to developing ones increased
from around 5 billion USD in 1991 to over 53 billion by 2008.6 This massive uptick in private
philanthropy in recent decades has been directly attributed to the massive uptick in private wealth.7
The dramatic increase in private philanthropy that manifested itself in the 21st century has resulted
in a dramatic shift in endowment practices, moving modern charities are increasingly moving form
advocates to investors.8 The massive increase in private wealth has resulted in a shift where social
and educational problems are being organized and addressed under the guise of “new
philanthropy” where philanthropists harness “market-based” solutions to modern problems.9 This
relatively new philosophy within philanthropy can blur the lines between what is considered a
foundation, a start-up, a social venture, and a venture capital fund.10 The traditional grant-driven
style of philanthropy, by itself, may be insufficient and is increasingly giving way to
2 Crutchfield, Leslie, et al. “Donors Must Change Their Ways If They Want Their Money to Make a Difference.”
Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 23, no. 10, Apr. 2011, p. 11.
3 Id. (check please)
4 David Moore & Douglas Rutzen, Legal Framework for Global Philanthropy: Barriers and Opportunities, The
International Journal of Not-for-Profit Law, VOLUME 13, ISSUES 1-2, APRIL 2011,
5 Id. (check please)
6 Id. (check please)
7 Id. (check please)
8 Alex Daniels, Rebecca Koenig, How New Philanthropy Is Divvying Up the Charity Dollar: And why nonprofits
fear they are losing out, Chronicle of Philanthropy. Dec 2017, Vol. 30 Issue 2, p18-23. BUCHANAN, PHIL. “5
Issues Foundations Must Confront to Stay Relevant.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 28, no. 8, June 2016, pp. 36–
40
9 Stephen J. Ball, Antonio Olmedo, Global Social Capitalism: using enterprise to solve the problems of the world,
Citizenship, 10&11 Social and Economic Education (2011)
10 Id. (check please)
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

entrepreneurial ventures in the context of charity.11 A style of philanthropists that focus on the
seeding of other businesses is called “philantrepreneurs.”12 Non-profits are no longer the only
vehicle for charitable distribution. For example, the Omidyar Network, the philanthropic arm of
billionaire eBay founder Pierre Omidyar, has both a foundation and a limited-liability
corporation.13 Since its founding in 2004, it has split its contributions almost evenly with 618
million USD going to non-profits and 563 million going to for-profits.14
The use of LLCs and other corporate entities are becoming increasingly popular in the
philanthropic world. Donors are often more concerned with getting the best social return on their
charitable giving, rather than merely writing checks.15 The highest profile philanthropists to
embrace this change are Mark Zuckerberg and his wife, Priscilla Chan.16 The Chan Zuckerberg
Initiative has fully embraced the LLC model; some commentators see this is a rational step because
LLCs offer flexibility to invest, to donate freely, and to donate to politicians.17 Moreover, some
donors prefer avoiding foundations because of the legal limitations donating to political
campaigns; alternatively, since the Supreme Court’s decision in Citizens United v. Federal
Election Commission, private corporations cannot be restricted by the United States government
for political donations.18
This reconfiguration of what constitutes charitable work has resulted in corporate foundations and
philanthropists assuming social and moral duties that had historically been assigned to civil society
organizations like government and state agencies.19 But it remains unclear if this new social and
moral influence of charities actually achieves the goal of the respective charities.
11 Short - Alex Daniels, Rebecca Koenig, How New Philanthropy Is Divvying Up the Charity Dollar: And why
nonprofits fear they are losing out, Chronicle of Philanthropy. Dec 2017, Vol. 30 Issue 2, p18-23.
12 Stephen J. Ball, Antonio Olmedo, Global Social Capitalism: using enterprise to solve the problems of the world,
Citizenship, 10&11 Social and Economic Education (2011)
13 Short - Alex Daniels, Rebecca Koenig, How New Philanthropy Is Divvying Up the Charity Dollar: And why
nonprofits fear they are losing out, Chronicle of Philanthropy. Dec 2017, Vol. 30 Issue 2, p18-23.
14 Id.
15 Id.
16 Id.
17 Id.
18 Id.
19 Stephen J. Ball, Antonio Olmedo, Global Social Capitalism: using enterprise to solve the problems of the world,
Citizenship, 10&11 Social and Economic Education (2011)
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Statistical Breakdown of Modern Charity
The data below illustrates some of the changes discussed earlier.
Figure #1 shows the charitable giving by Americans adjusted for inflation as of 2016.
Figure #1 Real Rise in U.S Giving (charitable donations after adjustment for inflation)20
Figure #2 shows the amount of private wealth that is attributed overseas. Moreover, it displays the
vast difference between overseas donations by private Americans versus its closest counterparts.
20 https://www.philanthropyroundtable.org/almanac/statistics/u.s.-generosity
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Figure #2 Private Donations for Overseas Aid21
Figure #3 shows the amount of private wealth that is attributed overseas. However, this graph also
displays that private American donations exceed United States government aid when it comes to
overseas charitable causes.
21 Id.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Figure #3 Private Overseas Donations vs. Government overseas aid22
Figure 4 provides a breakdown of U.S donations by various causes. It should be noted that religion,
being the largest category, is also an extremely broad category which contains many different sub-
causes like relief for the poor, medical care, education, or disaster relief.
Figure #4 Percentage of U.S Donations Going to Various Causes23
Figure #5 offers another source and a more recent analysis on the percentage of U.S recipients by
area of charity.24
22 Id.
23 Id.
24 https://nccs.urban.org/publication/nonprofit-sector-brief-2019#recipients
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Motivation
Flaws in Charitable Giving
Modern charitable giving is subject to several distinct problems. Three distinct and overarching
issues can be distinguished in the literature on charitable giving. The literature debates the validity
and scope of these three issues and many additional issues associated with modern charity.
However, the three issues below are the consistent themes that are discussed in different ways by
the literature:
1. The lack of transparency in modern charitable organizations
2. Power imbalances and lack of autonomy
3. Perverse legal incentives which limit effective gift giving
Lack of Transparency
A key problem that afflicts charitable organizations is the lack of trust the general population has
towards charitable organizations. Without trust in their ability to perform in accordance with their
donor’s intent, charitable organizations face many threats to their ability to carry out their missions.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Without public trust, charities may not be able to attract the necessary talent, raise cash, and
persuade the public to take action on social, environmental, and other key issues.”25
This lack of trust the public has towards charities can be illustrated with a prominent example.
CharityWatch routinely reports cases of abuse of the charitably giving system. For example, two
separate actions were filed by the Federal Trade Commission in conjunction with state charity
regulators from across the U.S to crack down on predatory practices of companies that solicit
donations on behalf of charities.26 These actions were the result of the defendants conducting “an
invasive robocall onslaught and keeping the lion’s share of more than 110 million of individual
contributions.”27 The defendants were accused of knowingly duping donors into believing that
their donations would help breast cancer patients, families of children with cancer, homeless
veterans, fire victims, and others in need. The scam defrauded the donor and no money went to
the charitable purposes the defendants described to the donors.”28
The lack of transparency in charitable giving has far reaching consequences. Private foundations
are less transparent and have fewer accountability mechanisms and regulations than businesses
and political activities.29 Private foundations have plutocratic power because such organizations’
leaders or trustees are not elected democratically, they are allowed to work in perpetuity, and their
operations lack accountability and transparency.30 That lack of transparency in big philanthropy
can contribute to a demise of democracy.31 Increased transparency may be necessary to avoid the
erosion of civic equality and democratic values.32
The concerns regarding the lack of transparency within charitable organizations is not limited to
the academic community. According to the 2019 Edelman Trust Barometer (an annual study of
25 GOSE, BEN. “The Trust Crisis.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 32, no. 3, Jan. 2020, pp. 12–14.
26 https://www.charitywatch.org/charity-donating-articles/fundraisers-for-f-rated-charities-hit-with-a-combined-
1702-million-in-legal-judgments
27 Id.
28 Id.
29 Rogers, Robin, “Why the Social Sciences Should Take Philanthropy Seriously”, Soc (2015) 52: 533-540
30 Reich, R. (2019). Philanthropy in the service of democracy. Stanford Social Innovation Review, 17-(1), 26-33.
31 Una Osili, Kinga Zsofia Horvath, Sasha Zarins, et. Al., An Annotated Bibliography of Recent Literature on
Current Developments in Philanthropy, February 2019.
32 Callahan, D. (2017). The Givers, wealth power, and philanthropy in a new gilded age. First edition. New York:
Alfred Knopf.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

institutions around the world) only 52% of Americans have faith that nonprofits will do the right
thing.33 Moreover, a survey by the Better Business Bureau found that 70% of Americans said that
trust is essential before making a donation, but fewer than 20% of Americans said they highly trust
charities.34 Many commentators agree that the lack of trust towards charities could depress giving,
making it harder for organizations to recruit good employees, and limit a foundations’ ability to
advocate effectively.
Power Imbalances
Power imbalances between the public and wealthy donors calls into question the long-term success
of charitable organizations. The most wealthy individuals on the planet have significant influence
on social institutions through their charitable organization.35 While social institutions may resist
the “reshaping” by charities, the public funding crisis in the government and nonprofit space
presents an opportunity where philanthropists can leverage underfunded causes and “reshape”
them according to their ideas.36 High-net-worth individuals may leverage underfunded causes with
corporate strategies to reduce problems corporate interests helped create.37
In essence, modern philanthropy puts far more power in the hands of the individual donor than
traditional philanthropy has done in decades. This can be traced back to modern philanthropic
strategies that entrust donors with identifying which problems need to be solved and then provide
the perceived appropriate solutions; rather than trusting the solutions proposed by the non-profits
themselves.38 This approach is more centralized and less grassroots39 for solving societal issues.
As more philanthropy transforms from being unconditional grant giving to a social investment, the
measurement of the social return on investment (SROI) has become increasingly important.40
33 GOSE, BEN. “The Trust Crisis.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 32, no. 3, Jan. 2020, pp. 12–14.
34 Id.
35 Mathew Bishop and Michael Green, Philanthrocapitalism: How Giving Can Save the World, Nov. 2009:
Bloomsbury Publishing USA.
36 Rogers, Robin, “Why the Social Sciences Should Take Philanthropy Seriously”, Soc (2015) 52: 533-540
37 Id.
38 Id. at 536
39 Id.
40 Phillips, S.D. and Jung, T. (2016) A New ‘New’ Philanthropy: from impetus to impact, in Jung T., Phillips, S.D.
and Harrow, J. (eds.) The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy, Routledge: London, pp. 5-34
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

However, some authors argue this has resulted in donors to expect some degree of “financial or
management oversite” similar to what investors use with young companies.41 Furthermore,
grantees often feel pressure from their donors to undertake specific projects and work in particular
ways to address the strategic goal set by the philanthropists.42 The constant appeasement of the
grantee to maintain funding from the donor is one of the most troubling complaints issues for
modern charities as pressure from donor interests increases steadily.43 Some commentators go so
far as to use the word “oligarchy” as philanthropy “increasingly becomes a playground for private
interests.”44
The emergence from bankruptcy by the City of Detroit in 2014 provides a prominent example. To
avoid creditors from exploiting thousands of pensions from city workers and to avoid losing an
impressive art collection, a group of foundations entered into an improbable arrangement.45 They
brokered a deal between Detroit and the philanthropists contingent upon “particular outcomes”
where unelected officials “flexed their political muscle to the limit.”46 The deal occurred behind
closed doors and raised many concerns over the opportunistic philanthropist’s role in the future of
the city of Detroit, and the overall implications on the future of public policy.47
In sum, there is a growing concern amongst commentators that modern philanthropy limits the
autonomy of grassroots charitable organizations and replaces it with a leveraged and exploitive
relationship where the goals of the donor are served above all.
Legal Incentives Undermine Effective Giving
41 REVERE, ELSPETH. “After 25 Years of Grant Making, I Worry We Have Lost Sight of Nonprofit Struggles.”
Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 28, no.11, Sept. 2016, pp. 28–31
42 Id.
43 Id.
44 BUCHANAN, PHIL. “5 Issues Foundations Must Confront to Stay Relevant.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 28,
no. 8, June 2016, pp. 36–40
45 Phillips, S.D. and Jung, T. (2016) A New ‘New’ Philanthropy: from impetus to impact, in Jung T., Phillips, S.D.
and Harrow, J. (eds.) The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy, Routledge: London, pp. 5-34
46 Id.
47 Id.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Tax Free Cash Hoarding
One of the main critiques of modern philanthropy is the often long gap between the time when
donors receive their tax deduction and when the money is actually employed for the intended
charitable ends. Boards and donors often seek to preserve their endowments rather than simply
spend the money.48 Rather than funds being employed immediately, the funds are allowed to
accrue tax free.49 This may run counter to the spirit of the rules governing charitable deductions
and may contribute to harmful inefficiency.50 This phenomenon has been called “Zombie Charity”
because by the time a donor sees their funds employed for charitable purposes, they are already
dead. As the law stands in 2021, foundations are only required to spend 5% of their assets a year.51
Although this is a minimum requirement for foundations, many boards view 5% as the default
rule.
Legal Barriers to Cross-Border Philanthropy
Another critique of modern charity revolve around the legal barriers many jurisdictions have
instituted that limit international philanthropy. While the significant amount of wealth used for
international philanthropy is increasing steadily, the volume of assets alone does not necessarily
mean no present challenges exist to those who want to help beyond their own borders. These legal
barriers can be broken down into 2 categories: “outflow” constraints, and “inflow” constraints.52
1. Outflow Constraints: Constraints imposed by the donor nation on the outflow of
philanthropy
2. Inflow Constraints: Constraints imposed by the recipient nation on the inflow of
philanthropy
Outflow Constraints
48 “Put a Stake in ‘Zombie Charity.’ Philanthropy Is for the Living.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 31, no. 11, Sept.
2019, pp. 31–32.
49 Id
50 Id
51 Id
52 David Moore & Douglas Rutzen, Legal Framework for Global Philanthropy: Barriers and Opportunities, The
International Journal of Not-for-Profit Law, VOLUME 13, ISSUES 1-2, APRIL 2011,
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Philanthropists in a given jurisdiction may have to address significant limitations on foreign
grantmaking by tax-exempt entities. For example, in India, tax-exempt entities must apply their
assets within India’s borders. Therefore, if an Indian philanthropic organization wanted to help
causes outside of India, that organization would now be liable to tax.53
The second constraint that international philanthropists may encounter is the requirement of
advanced government approval in a given jurisdiction. For example, in the United Arab Emirates,
Article 43 of the Federal Law No. 2 prohibits the distribution of grants, gifts, donations, or other
transfers to foreign entities without ministerial approval.54 Likewise, in Egypt, Article 17 of Law
No. 84 prohibits domestic NGOs from sending funds or other materials to foreign organizations
without government approval. For further examples see citation.
The third outflow issue involves jurisdictions that offer limited, or no tax incentives for
international philanthropy. For example in Australia, recipients eligible to receive gifts for which
the donor may claim a deduction must be within Australia. Recipients who are not in Australia
cannot be deductible gift recipients.55
Another main constraint on international philanthropists are counter-terrorism regulations.
Philanthropists need to address the migration from a tax-based regulatory scheme to a legal
environment modelled on the fight against money laundering and terrorism.56 For example,
regulations in the U.K terrorism measures prohibits any U.K national or other person within the
U.K jurisdiction from knowingly dealing with “funds or economic resources” belonging to listed
persons without authorization from the Treasury. These lists include al-Qaida and the Taliban, but
also include nations like Belarus, Myanmar, Liberia, Somalia, and Zimbabwe.57
Inflow Constraints
53 Id
54 Id
55 Id
56 Id
57 Id
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

The first constraint that grant recipients may face is advanced government approval. Some nations
require organizations who receive international funds to report those funds to their governments.
For example, in Jordan, foreign funding is subject to the approval of the Council of Ministers.
Organizations who receive funding must report the source of funding, the amount of funding, the
means of transfer, and the objectives for which the funding will be spent.58
The second main constraint are nations that require philanthropic funds to be funneled through
government channels before dispersing to the rightful recipients. For example, in Eritrea,
international NGOs may only engage in activities through “the Ministry or other concerned
government entity.”59
Another restraint on recipients can be the burdensome notification and reporting requirements.
Although this is not as burdensome as getting government approval prior to funding, it may still
undermine the uninterrupted flow of funding to potential recipients.60 For example, in Turkey, the
law imposes notification requirements relating to the receipt of foreign funding, where foundations
must notify Turkish authorities within one month after receiving the funding and associations must
notify the government before using the received donations.61
The last main inflow issue for grant recipients are the foreign exchange restrictions. For example,
where the value of foreign currencies is set at official rates far below the parallel market rates, this
may act as a barrier to international philanthropy. For example, in Venezuela, currently only
transactions through the Central Bank of Venezuela are approved and only at the official rate of
4.3 Venezuelan Bolivar per 1 USD. This is suggested to have a negative impact on philanthropy
because the actual rate of exchange is closer to 8 VEB to 1 USD. Additionally, circumventing
these restrictions results in severe penalties.62
58 Id
59 Id
60 Id
61 Id
62 Id
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

In essence, international philanthropy may run into many barriers depending on jurisdiction,
funding purpose, and political issues. Philanthropists have several options to deal with these issues
and potentially alleviate some of these complex problems. For example, philanthropists can inquire
and survey current international philanthropists to learn about specific challenges; they can index
the existing barriers to international philanthropy; expand the tools and resources to help
foundations navigate the complex legal environment; monitor legal developments across the world
concerning philanthropy; support the development of good principles/protocols for international
philanthropy; and support efforts to reform laws and policies.63
Proposed Solutions
Increased Regulatory Oversight
Regulatory reform is typically on top of the agenda in centralized legacy circles to address
suboptimal institutional design. For example, the IRS division charged with monitoring charities
remains understaffed and underfinanced and is only able to audit a small percentage of charities
annually.64 Remedies could include allowing states enhanced access to IRS information.65 The
Pension Protection Act of 2006 allowed the IRS to share more information from charity tax records
with state officials so they could investigate possible violations of state law. However, the act also
established strict controls over how such information could be used; for example, state officials
who contact a charity may not say their inquiry was prompted by information obtained from the
IRS.66
The community is evaluating arguments for and against a national oversight body that is tasked
with the supervision of charitable organizations. Community proposals in this context include
setting up a new division in the Treasury Department or other federal agency along the lines of the
SEC, the FTC, or Britain’s Charity Commission.67 Others argue that a new agency would be
63 Id
64 Perry, Suzanne. “Lack of Serious Oversight of Charities Undermines Public Trust. (Cover Story).” Chronicle of
Philanthropy, vol. 25, no. 2, Nov.2012
65 Id
66 Id
67 Id
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

overreach and instead the IRS should focus their resources on “complex” charity organizations
with annual revenues that exceed 10 million USD. By concentrating on the understanding of these
large and complex charitable organizations, the IRS could extend its capacity to identify and curtail
abuse of nonprofit status by opportunistic enterprises which would help preserve the integrity and
reputation of America’s nonprofits.68
Harness Technology
Technology upgrades provide (decentralized) alternative solutions outside the realm of regulatory
top down government sponsored initiatives to address the shortcomings of the charity
infrastructure. In particular, technology enables heightened transparency and accountability for
charities which is easily implemented and lowers cost. For example, in 2014, a youth coding
nonprofit called Hack Club designed a tool to track all the Hack Club’s finances in real time.69 In
essence, this tool serves as a public ledger that is available to anyone online. Within the ledger, all
the nonprofit’s transactions are tracked and recorded in real time and publicly displayed. SnapChat
executives donated 1 million USD to Hack Club in support of the nonprofit’s transparency work.
Ethereum founder Vitalik Buterin donated $300,000 USD and Elon Musk donated as well.70 As a
result, 36 student-run nonprofits have made their finances public using the Hack Club Bank
transparency tool.71
Distributed ledger technologies (DLT) are particularly capable of increasing trust between
charitable organizations, sponsors, and beneficiaries. The technology enables real-time tracking of
the donation supply chain.72 The technology enhances transparency by disclosing sponsor identity,
funds’ value, origin, destination, and purpose.73
68 Putnam Barber & Steven Rathgeb Smith, Regulation of “Classic” Community-Based Charitable Organizations,
De Gruyter, (October 31, 2020) https://doi.org/10.1515/npf-2020-0006.
69 Chirstina Asquith, The Chronicle of Philanthropy, August, 2021 pp. 22-23
70 Id.
71 Id.
72 Citation: Christie A (2020) Can Distributed Ledger Technologies Promote Trust for Charities? A Literature
Review. Front. Blockchain 3:31. doi: 10.3389/fbloc.2020.00031
73 Avdoshin, Sergey, Pesotskaya, Elena, “Blockchain in Charity: Platform for Tracking Donations”, Proceedings of
the Future Technologies Conference (FTC) 2020, Volume 2 (pp.689-701); Farooq, Muhammad Shoaib, Khan,
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

CHARITYxDAO
DAOs have the potential to address the above identified flaws in the charitable giving process.
DAOs are truly global borderless entities that coordinate agency relationships and limit liabilities
via smart contracts. DAOs can use elements of profit generation and redistribution in a way that in
effect combines capitalistic and socialistic ideas. DAOs allow for the organization of society in
economic structures that generate profit while at the same time redistributing resources. DAOs
combine elements of socialistic cooperatives with the meritocracy and incentivization of capitalism.
This paper conceptualizes the benefits of DAOs in charitable organizations thorough a case study
of a CHARITYxDAO.
The basic concept of the CHARITYxDAO derives from the basic insight that charitable giving has
to be fully transparent and hosted by a group of charity experts who have hands-on experience in
fostering common good outcomes directly – not as an intermediary or sponsor. In the
CHARITYxDAO, only those who have done good and can provide objective and traceable
evidence of their actions for the common good are onboarded into the CHARITYxDAO
community.
In particular, the CHARITYxDAO mandates that onboarded VAs show evidence of having raised
charity donations proactively and individually as well as showing evidence of having distributed
those donations successfully to fulfill the donative intent. Only those who demonstrate both 1.
Successful fundraising, and 2. Fulfilling the donative intent are eligible for CHARITYxDAO voting
associate (VA) status. Once onboarded, newly elected CHARITYxDAO VAs are now also eligible
to help select other CHARITYxDAO applicants. The details for this process are explained in
Subchapter on onboarding below.
Misbah, Abid, Adnan, “A framework to make charity collection transparent and auditable using blockchain
technology”, Computers and Electrical Engineering 83 (2020)
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Fixing Charitable Giving
DAOs are ideally positioned to fix the three core identified issues in charitable giving:
1. Lack of Transparency,
2. Power Imbalance, and
3. Legal Incentives.
Increasing Transparency
Modern philanthropic strategies entrust individual donors with the responsibility of identifying
which human problems need to be solved with the donor’s assets and then provide the perceived
appropriate solutions. Because of the focus on a single donor who is often not accountable to the
public and can use a private foundation, without public disclosure obligations, to undermine asset
allocation transparency, modern charities are often subject to a significant level of lack of
transparency.
The CHARITYxDAO uses DLT technology and layer 2 solutions like Polychain (Matic) to
address transparency concerns. Through the use of DLT technology, all governance votes and
endowment allocation decisions are fully publicly visible and can be audited by the public at will.
Moreover, all onchain data is immutable and can be accessed by the public. The CHARITYxDAO
Forum allows for public comments in a fully transparent way. Through the public forum
comments, the public can directly address and call out perceived inequities and transparency
concerns as they may pertain to the DAO.
The public commenting function on the forum helps the CHARITYxDAO internalize information
form the edges of the charity ecosystem that otherwise would have no agency in any charitable
organization. This new information from the edges of the charity ecosystem further increases the
accountabily of the CHARITYxDAO to unprecedented levels. It allows the CHARITYxDAO to
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

continuously iterate on its endowment practices and morph into community structures that are
driven by community consensus. The community consensus can morph constantly through the
new information that reaches the CHARITYxDAO. This makes the organization much more alert
and “live” than many Zombie Charities that have little to no activity and/or public engagement.
The forum comments also help the CHARITYxDAO recruit top talent constantly. The
CHARITYxDAO forum comments help the existing CHARITYxDAO VAs identify the most
competent commenters. Those help the existing VA community do its job and at the same time
become resources that can be leveraged by the VA community. If the information is relevant and
material to the CHARITYxDAO work, the commenter may be invited to apply for VA status by
providing work for a grant. This helps increase the quality of talent that is onboarded into the
CHARITYxDAO VA pool and creates constant onboarding feedback effects. Such feedback
effects cannot exist in traditional centralized charitable organizations.
The CHARITYxDAO addresses the lack of transparency through charity expert community audits.
CHARITYxDAO’s on-chain governance increases transparency to unparalleled levels and takes
the donation out of the hands of the individual donor (who may one-sidedly or mistakenly allocate
assets to further the donor’s donative intent). Instead, the asset allocation and policing decisions
are put into the hands of the community of CHARITYxDAO VAs. This increases transparency
and checks and balances dramatically. The donor is, not simply handing over the assets to a
centralized group of individuals (who may be colluding with the sponsor to hide assets etc.) the
donor may trust but instead hands the assets over to a community of experts in the particular
charitable endeavor the donor has selected. With this asset allocation to the CHARITYxDAO, the
donor enables full transparency via community audits of the donor’s endowment purpose. The
charity experts in the CHARITYxDAO are responsible for policing the distribution of assets in the
endowment in a fully transparent and auditable fashion.
Equity
Modern philanthropic strategies entrust donors with the responsibility of identifying which human
problems need to be solved with the donor assets and then provide the perceived appropriate
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

solutions. Because of these dynamics, modern philanthropy puts far more power in the hands of
the individual donor than traditional philanthropy has done in decades. In turn, because of the key
role of the donor, most modern charities are highly centralized around the single individual donor
or donor family. Minorities and information from the edges of the charity ecosystem do not have
agency in this system. Accordingly, modern philanthropy limits the autonomy of grassroots
charitable organizations and replaces it with a leveraged and exploitative relationship where the
goals of the donor are served above all.
Through community governance, the CHARITYxDAO addresses the power imbalance between
the sponsor, the beneficiaries, and the larger charity community and enables a grassroots charitable
organization that extends the lifespan and legacy of the philanthropic intent. By giving the power
of the endowment to the CHARITYxDAO, the donor relinquishes the control over the assets to
gain community governance and community engagement with the donative intent. Rather than
giving assets to a centralized entity that has no incentives to relinquish the assets to a larger
community but may wish to retain control for their own special interests, the donor ab initio
engages the larger community through the endowment. The fully transparent CHARITYxDAO
governance ensures that any semblance of special interests in the VA community and the larger
charity community as it pertains to the DAO endowment are called out via the forum.
The donor benefits from the enhanced decentralization via the CHARITYxDAO because, rather
than having a singular centralized entity promote the donor’s interests, the donor gets a community
of experts behind his donative intent. The donor can help mold the community to some extnt but
at the same time the donor releases the control to the community. The relinquishment of control
builds trust and community buy in. This in turn, ensures growth and legacy for the respective
purpose of the donor and the associated DAO.
Incentive Optimization
The existing regulatory infrastructure in many jurisdictions incentivizes delayed releases of
endowment funds and hoarding of assets. Rather than releasing funds according to their donative
intent, the assets are often allowed to accrue tax free, resulting in so-called Zombie Charities.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

because by the time a donor sees their funds employed for charitable purposes, they are already
dead.
In contrast to the existing legacy structures, and depending on the respective DAO design, DAOs
are incentivized to immediately release the endowed assets if and when the work for the donation
has been finished. The DAO community controls the governance variables under which assets are
released and the policies on the asset release. Community audits ensure full transparency and donor
intent is fulfilled.
Foundational Beliefs
The CHARITYxDAO community recognizes that decentralized governance as promulgated in
Calcaterra and Kaal (2021)74 and as first instantiated by the DEVxDAO, among other later
instantiations by other DAO communities, provides the necessary decentralized evolutionary and
dynamic governance that forms the foundation of the CHARITYxDAO community values and core
beliefs. Decentralized governance provides cohesion and longevity in the CHARITYxDAO.
The CHARITYxDAO VAs are united by several core beliefs and insights.
1. Decentralized systems are ideally positioned to support charitable giving
2. Charitable giving has to be organized by experts for experts in charitable fundraising and
distribution
3. Donative intent is best accomplished through a crow-wisdom driven collective reasoning
process - in which the donor participates to some extent.
4. The unifying CHARITYxDAO values are of central importance for CHARITYxDAO
membership and its resulting long-term cohesion, stability, cooperation, and continual
dynamic evolution.
5. The unifying values, as instantiated in the CHARITYxDAO, increase operational efficiency
in the CHARITYxDAO.
74 Calcaterra & Kaal, Decentralization: Technology’s Impact on Organizational and Societal Structure DeGruyter
(2021). https://www.amazon.com/Decentralization-Technologies-Organizational-Societal-
Structure/dp/3110673924/ref=tmm_pap_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Engaging the Donor
Engaging the donor of the CHARITYxDAO endowment into the DAO has long-term benefits for
the CHARITYxDAO ecosystem. The donor typically has a large network of charity contacts that
can benefit the DAO. Moreover, the donor has often a lot of knowledge about the type of charitable
engagement the donor is seeding. This knowledge and influence should be retained for the
betterment of the CHARITYxDAO.
Seeding Charity Purpose
To retain donor engagement with the CHARITYxDAO, the donor can designate a particular
purpose for the endowment and can help seed the founding members of the DAO the donor wishes
to create. Once the founding DAO members are selected and equipped with reputation, the donor
can monitor the quality of onboarding decisions and project sponsored by the DAO. Depending
on the maturity of the CHARITYxDAO expert pool, the donor may mandate the seeding of a
particular group of experts in a new DAO that is dedicated exclusively to the charitable intent of
the donor. For this purpose, the donor may simply clone the voting engine of the CHARITYxDAO
(or use a plug and play DAO aggregator tool) to set up the new specific charitable purpose DAO
expert community.
Public Monitoring
Continuing donor engagement can be ensured through full transparency. CHARITYxDAO
transparency in the portal and the forum ensures that the donor can directly monitor any and all
charitable actions the VAs are engaging in, including the pipeline of grant applications, the work
product provided on the respective grant, all votes by the CHARITYxDAO community and the
reputation weights associated with the votes. This allows the donor to provide indirect input on
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

outcomes in the CHARITYxDAO Forum where his role can be flagged (anonymously if needed)
via a special identification/designation. At the same time, the donor does not (necessarily) exercise
control in this system as the donor has the same access rights as any public forum participant in
the CHARITYxDAO.
Endowment Allocation
Donor engagement can be incentivized through allocating a multisig key (among many - without
donor control) to the donor. The endowment wallet that is housed in the CHARITYxDAO legal
wrapper can be set up as a multisign wallet with multiple keys for core constituents. The exercise
of the multisig wallet keys will ultimately always depend on a CHARITYxDAO vote in the
assembly of the CHARITYxDAO association (the legal wrapper – if chosen to be a Swiss
Association). As a multisig key holder, the donor will be involved in multisig endowment payment
decisions. The single multisig key the donor controls (as part of the multisig endowment wallet in
the CHARITYxDAO legal wrapper) allows the donor at least some continuing contribution over
the allocation of the assets. Even if the donor does not have a multisig key, each release of assets
can be monitored by the donor fully transparently via the CHARITYxDAO interface and forum.
While the donor may willingly be outvoted by the CHARITYxDAO in the multisig decision over
asset designation, the donor still retains an interest in and engagement with the endowed assets.
This benefits the DAO on multiple levels. The ongoing tutelage of the donor helps bring talent and
resources to the DAO and enables a continuing fundraising effort. At the same time, the knowledge
of the donor and the donor network can continue to seed projects and engagement for the DAO.
Donor Marjority Reputation Stake
The donor can also choose to become part of the DAO with a majority reputation stake. This is a
less decentralized option that may be available to the donor. In this design, the donor controls 50%
of reputation from the beginning and votes on each proposal for endowment distribution with the
other members of the DAO who are selected experts. This voting includes the onboarding votes
of new DAO members/VAs. Onboarded VAs do not dilute the 50% reputation allocation of the
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

donor. The donor can always outstake the rest of the collective if the donor so chooses. At the
same time, the donor retains the ability to rely on the onboarded charity experts to help fulfill the
donor’s purpose for the endowment and the donor’s charitable intent.
Governance
The CHARITYxDAO governance75 is designed to avoid the corruptive effects of existing
governance designs in philanthropic and charitable institutions with fungible assets in legacy
systems. The CHARITYxDAO’s long-term success depends on its ability to maintain the dynamic
decentralized fluidity and dynamic decentralized order. Without it, the CHARITYxDAO’s values
that initially united and reinforced the CHARITYxDAO VAs are at risk of morphing into ever
tighter, complex, and hierarchical structures.
Key features
The CHARITYxDAO’s long-term success depends on its ability to maintain the dynamic
decentralized fluidity and dynamic decentralized order. Without it, the CHARITYxDAO’s values
that initially united and reinforced the CHARITYxDAO VAs are at risk of morphing into ever
tighter, complex, and hierarchical structures.
Several key governance features and system design elements distinguish the CHARITYxDAO:
1. CHARITYxDAO VAship applicants choose to join the CHARITYxDAO only if the values
of the CHARITYxDAO as a collective correspond with their own existing skillset,
convictions, values, knowledge base, and belief system.
2. The CHARITYxDAO elicits and reinforces each VA’s particular skillsets and their
respective belief system as it pertains to decentralized charitable giving. As such, the
CHARITYxDAO provides a strong affirmation, reinforcement, and feedback loop for
decentralized charitable giving.
3. The following decentralized design elements are key to the CHARITYxDAO’s long-term
success:
75 See above Calcaterra & Kaal (2021).
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

a. full transparency, e.g. all CHARITYxDAO decisions are fully transparent and
accessible by the public and the CHARITYxDAO VAs themselves;
b. merit identifiers, e.g. CHARITYxDAO VAs’ skill, knowledge, and influence is
measured through their respective CHARITYxDAO non-fungible reputation token
ownership;
c. decisions in the CHARITYxDAO are made with a voting design that revolves
around staking of non-fungible reputation tokens;
d. non-fungibility of CHARITYxDAO reputation tokens; e.g. merit of a
CHARITYxDAO VA is expressed by a non-fungible reputation token that cannot
be bought or sold;
e. Fungibility of VA salaries: VA Salaries are paid in proportion to their respective VA
reputation scores. In other words, the reputation salary is paid out in fungible tokens
pro rata to reputation score of each VA at the point of payment. This design ensures
second order economic effects and indirect economic incentives in the
CHARITYxDAO, e.g. CHARITYxDAO VAs are getting paid with fungible tokens
in proportion to their non-fungible reputation tokens;
f. CHARITYxDAO VAs increase their non-fungible reputation tokens by making
valuable contributions to and participating consistently in CHARITYxDAO voting
pools.
g. CHARITYxDAO’s fungible salary tokens are generated through a diverse set of
grantors/sponsors/donors
h. anonymity of CHARITYxDAO VAs, e.g. after an initial setup and development
period with less anonymity, CHARITYxDAO merit identifiers revolve around
reputation scores and VAs of the CHARITYxDAO community can predominantly
be identified by their respective reputation score in the CHARITYxDAO structure.
i. The CHARITYxDAO uses a two-vote model on every decision the
CHARITYxDAO has to make.
i. Two vote model a) loosely coupled (sentiment) vote (no reputation at stake),
b) tightly coupled (final) vote (reputation at stake):
1. In the loosely coupled vote, CHARITYxDAO VAs can vote their
conscience on all issues involved in the vote. No slashing of their
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

reputation will happen during this sentiment vote. This incentivizes
VAs to “speak up” with their vote after careful evaluation of the
issues at stake.
2. During and before the tightly coupled vote, CHARITYxDAO VAs
can see the vote outcomes form the loosely coupled / sentiment vote.
They can see how much reputation was staked by whom on what
outcomes, e.g. up (for) and down (against) a proposal. This helps
VAs form an opinion on whether they wish to continue voting in the
final tightly coupled vote in the same way they voted in the loosely
coupled sentiment vote. Very few VAs will decide to vote the same
way if they were on the loosing side in the loosely coupled sentiment
vote. Accordingly, it is reasonable to expect that the overwhelming
majority of CHARITYxDAO’s final tightly coupled votes will end
in unanimity on the issue at hand. The two-vote design provides a
consensus building mechanism for the CHARITYxDAO VA
community. Sponsors benefit from this consensus building
mechanism because the process helps fulfill donative intent with a
community and crowd wisdom validation.
j. Reputation tokens are generated ONLY for long term valuable philanthropic work
and policing of work NOT for business development etc. work that does not enhance
the value proposition of the CHARITYxDAO long-term
Reputation Staking for the Common Good
The use of reputation staking metrics in the CHARITYxDAO’s internal governance design serves
the common good.
First, it overcomes the all too common polarizing effects and suboptimal vote outcomes of one-
token-one-vote voting mechanisms.
Second, the reputation staking design avoid the corruptive effects of fungible token staking because
non-fungible reputation has to be built organically through merit and time, it needs to be earned and
cannot be bought. Moreover, the non-fungibility of the reputation and ideally its anonymity
decreases the attack vectors for the system dramatically because it becomes much harder for internal
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

and external actors to manipulate and game the system in an effort to improve their own benefits to
the detriment of the common good of all participants in the CHARITYxDAO ecosystem.
Third, reputation staking optimally aligns incentives for CHARITYxDAO VAs individually and at
the same time aligns their incentives for the totality of the CHARITYxDAO as an institution with
its common good objectives. CHARITYxDAO reputation token holders are incentivized to increase
their own reputation/utility by engaging in valuable conduct for the community. The common good
gets served through this design in particular because the more the aggregated individual reputation
of all CHARITYxDAO VAs increases the more the overall CHARITYxDAO value increases and
the more the CHARITYxDAO creates value enhancing outcomes for the sponsors and VA
community at large. These feedback effects enable a constantly reinforcing feedback loop for good.
The transparency of eternally viewable reputation-staking in the CHARITYxDAO incentivizes its
VAs to provide long-term positive contributions to the community for good. This transparency
enables a consistent, incremental, and stable review process. Yet, individual CHARITYxDAO VA
reputation changes dynamically constantly through action and by default also through inaction
because VA reputation is inflationary in the CHARITYxDAO design. The design decreases the
likelihood of individual and, in turn, community liveness fault because non-use of existing
reputation on the individual level leads to inflationary devaluation. This incentivizes action and thus
constant value enhancement for good.
To create the proper incentive design in its reputation staking engine, the CHARITYxDAO
incorporates several game-theoretical insights:
- The CHARITYxDAO disincentivize betrayal and defection by charging an admission fee, ie. DoS
fee to become a CHARITYxDAO VA. Given the sunk cost of joining the CHARITYxDAO, it is
more expensive for prospective VAs to cheat because it would be expensive to rejoin even if VAs
could be anonymous. The CHARITYxDAO also blacklists VA accounts to incentivize cooperation.
KYC protocols further expand those incentives to cooperate.
- To ensure continuous cooperation of CHARITYxDAO VAs, the promise of future cashflows that
are paid proportional to the CHARITYxDAO reputation token outweigh their present value.
- The larger the CHARITYxDAO network the more the competition increases among VAs for
reputation tokens to receive fungible token salaries that are paid in proportion to reputation tokens.
Accordingly, in the CHARITYxDAO design, the loss of opportunity from slashing
CHARITYxDAO VA reputation grows as the size of the network increases.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

- Anonymity increases the value of the reputation token. As the information asymmetries and
incomplete information increase because of the increasing anonymity, the value of the information
that derives from reputation tokens increases. When potential business partners have less
knowledge of CHARITYxDAO VAs’ identity, the knowledge from the number of reputation
tokens a CHARITYxDAO VA holds becomes more important. Moreover, the lack of personal
knowledge encourages the CHARITYxDAO VAs to devote more effort to fairly policing reputation
tokens.
- Punishment for nefarious conduct becomes automated and therefore credible. The
CHARITYxDAO reputation staking design also enhances policing and compliance. The value of
CHARITYxDAO VA reputation is directly related to how well punishment can be distributed in
response to nefarious VA conduct. In the CHARITYxDAO design, algorithms are used to
determine nefarious VA conduct. If a CHARITYxDAO VA’s reputation was slashed by VA vote,
such VA will not be chosen by the algorithm.
- Equity and the common good. The CHARITYxDAO’s design enables an equal distribution of
power through its reputation-based governance and anonymity. Group identifiers, culture,
language, religion, race, physical presence, etc., influence centralized power distribution. Therefore,
commonly used identifiers, such as social media profiles and credit scores in centralized legacy
systems, among others, play less of a role in the CHARITYxDAO voting designs. The more equal
distribution of power in the CHARITYxDAO governance design allows the inclusion of
constituents who otherwise have no agency in centralized systems.
Slashing Reputation
- Explain slashing events and background / incentives.
Community Audits
Community audits are a key feature in the governance of the CHARITYxDAO. Community audit
revolves around the idea of allowing experts in philanthropy to evaluate other experts. This
governance structure of the CHARITYxDAO enables enhanced efficiency of coordination because
the VAs in the CHARITYxDAO, with their unique and highly specialized skillsets in the context
of philanthropy, are ideally positioned to identify other experts in philanthropy. This allows the
identification of candidate VA qualities from the edge of the centralized system in a continuous
and iterative stream of information that provides dynamic feedback effects to the system. In other
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

words, experts in philanthropy that may have moved philanthropic projects but were not recognized
by large centralized charitable institutions can apply to the CHARITYxDAO for inclusion and may
be considered if the evidence provided is satisfactory to the CHARITYxDAO VA community. As
such, the CHARITYxDAO may present an alternative to traditional community based philanthropic
endeavors.
The onboarding decision by the CHARITYxDAO VA community may go beyond just project audit
but may become a stamp of approval for follow-on investments. The upvote of a project and the
associated onboarding decision for a new VA are a community endorsement of the quality and
ethics of a philanthropic project. As the scale of the CHARITYxDAO grows, such onboarding
decisions may develop a significant signaling function and may serve as a conversation started for
follow-on investments. Similar to how centralized institutions rely on the vetting of candidates from
other centralized institutions, the CHARITYxDAO may serve as a decentralized oracle for
philanthropic endeavors.
Onboarding
The CHARITYxDAO uses two types of onboarding sets:
1. TYPE 1: Projects that raised funds and distributed such funds to the poor / for good can
apply for VA status upon providing evidence of their performance with their project to the
CHARITYxDAO via the portal forum. Such TYPE 1 VA candidates fall under the
following procedures:
a. The treasury of the CHARITYxDAO will match the assets the candidate raised
b. The value of the assets they raised will be used for the minting of reputation under
the DEVxDAO MVPR with a minting ratio of $1000/Rep1
c. The voting engine automatically stakes 50% of the newly minted reputation up for
the VA candidate and 50% down against the candidate proposal – then the validation
pool starts under MVPR
d. The matched assets are held in the smart contract and will be distributed to either 1.
The VA candidate, or 2. To the respective project, ONLY IF the candidate can show
satisfactory evidence that the matched assets can reasonably be expected to be
distributed in the same fashion as the assets the candidate raised him or herself
following the earlier fundraise campaign.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

e. Once the project gets upvoted under 1.d. above, the assets will be distributed via
milestone votes. In each milestone, the candidate has to provide evidence of
fulfilling donative intent and allocation of assets in accordance with the project
parameters.
2. TYPE 2: VA candidates can apply for funds from the CHARITYxDAO without providing
evidence of fundraising success of the VA candidate. Such TYPE 2 VA candidates fall
under the following procedures:
a. The treasury of the CHARITYxDAO will fund the project presented by the
candidate if the CHARITYxDAO VA community upvotes the project
b. The value of the assets paid out of the treasury of the CHARITYxDAO will be used
for the minting of reputation under the DEVxDAO MVPR with a minting ratio of
$1000/Rep1
c. The voting engine automatically stakes 50% of the newly minted reputation up for
the VA candidate and 50% down against the candidate proposal – then the validation
pool starts under MVPR
d. The treasury assets are held in the smart contract and will be distributed to either 1.
The VA candidate, or 2. To the respective project, ONLY IF the VA candidate can
show satisfactory evidence that the assets can reasonably be expected to be
distributed in the fashion indicated on the candidate’s application.
e. Once the project gets upvoted under 2.d. above, the assets will be distributed via
milestone votes. In each milestone, the candidate has to provide evidence of
fulfilling donative intent and allocation of assets in accordance with the project
parameters.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Conclusion
Philanthropy and charity in the 21st century is becoming increasingly complex as individuals and
organizations look for new ways to maximize or exploit current structures. This topic is becoming
even more complex as more millionaires and billionaires look for ways to wield their wealth. The
CHARITYxDAO provides a powerful way to decentralize the existing legacy charitable
organizations and address many of their challenges. Implementation in code will yield interesting
experiments and allow to iterate on optimization attempts.
Bibliography
Alex Daniels, Rebecca Koenig, How New Philanthropy Is Divvying Up the Charity Dollar: And
why nonprofits fear they are losing out, Chronicle of Philanthropy. Dec 2017, Vol. 30 Issue 2,
p18-23.
Crutchfield, Leslie, et al. “Donors Must Change Their Ways If They Want Their Money to Make
a Difference.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 23, no. 10, Apr. 2011, p. 11.
David Moore & Douglas Rutzen, Legal Framework for Global Philanthropy: Barriers and
Opportunities, The International Journal of Not-for-Profit Law, VOLUME 13, ISSUES 1-2,
APRIL 2011
BUCHANAN, PHIL. “5 Issues Foundations Must Confront to Stay Relevant.” Chronicle of
Philanthropy, vol. 28, no. 8, June 2016, pp. 36–40
Stephen J. Ball, Antonio Olmedo, Global Social Capitalism: using enterprise to solve the
problems of the world, Citizenship, 10&11 Social and Economic Education (2011)
https://www.philanthropyroundtable.org/almanac/statistics/u.s.-generosity
https://nccs.urban.org/publication/nonprofit-sector-brief-2019#recipients
GOSE, BEN. “The Trust Crisis.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 32, no. 3, Jan. 2020, pp. 12–14.
https://www.charitywatch.org/charity-donating-articles/fundraisers-for-f-rated-charities-hit-with-
a-combined-1702-million-in-legal-judgments
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

Rogers, Robin, “Why the Social Sciences Should Take Philanthropy Seriously”, Soc (2015) 52:
533-540
Una Osili, Kinga Zsofia Horvath, Sasha Zarins, et. Al., An Annotated Bibliography of Recent
Literature on Current Developments in Philanthropy, February 2019.
Callahan, D. (2017). The Givers, wealth power, and philanthropy in a new gilded age. First
edition. New York: Alfred Knopf
Reich, R. (2019). Philanthropy in the service of democracy. Stanford Social Innovation Review,
17-(1), 26-33.
Perry, Suzanne. “Lack of Serious Oversight of Charities Undermines Public Trust. (Cover
Story).” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 25, no. 2, Nov. 2012
Putnam Barber & Steven Rathgeb Smith, Regulation of “Classic” Community-Based Charitable
Organizations, De Gruyter, (October 31, 2020) https://doi.org/10.1515/npf-2020-0006.
Chirstina Asquith, The Chronicle of Philanthropy, August, 2021 pp. 22-23
Citation: Christie A (2020) Can Distributed Ledger Technologies Promote Trust for Charities? A
Literature Review. Front. Blockchain 3:31. doi: 10.3389/fbloc.2020.00031
Avdoshin, Sergey, Pesotskaya, Elena, “Blockchain in Charity: Platform for Tracking
Donations”, Proceedings of the Future Technologies Conference (FTC) 2020, Volume 2 (pp.689-
701)
Farooq, Muhammad Shoaib, Khan, Misbah, Abid, Adnan, “A framework to make charity
collection transparent and auditable using blockchain technology”, Computers and Electrical
Engineering 83 (2020)
Mathew Bishop and Michael Green, Philanthrocapitalism: How Giving Can Save the World,
Nov. 2009: Bloomsbury Publishing USA.
REVERE, ELSPETH. “After 25 Years of Grant Making, I Worry We Have Lost Sight of
Nonprofit Struggles.” Chronicle of Philanthropy, vol. 28, no.11, Sept. 2016, pp. 28–31
Phillips, S.D. and Jung, T. (2016) A New ‘New’ Philanthropy: from impetus to impact, in Jung
T., Phillips, S.D. and Harrow, J. (eds.) The Routledge Companion to Philanthropy, Routledge:
London, pp. 5-34
“Put a Stake in ‘Zombie Charity.’ Philanthropy Is for the Living.” Chronicle of Philanthropy,
vol. 31, no. 11, Sept. 2019, pp. 31–32.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3981021

