INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS: EMERGING PRACTICES, RISK
FACTORS, AND RED FLAGS
Wulf A. Kaal* & Marco Dell’Erba**
Forthcoming in: FINTECH HANDBOOK, Florian Möslein & Sebastian
Omlor eds., Verlag C.H. Beck (2018)
ABSTRACT
Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs) are the most efficient means of
financing entrepreneurial initiatives in the history of capital
formation. ICOs minimize transaction cost and democratize finance
while dis-intermediating banks. Yet, ICOs have increasingly
involved cases of abuse, lacking quality, and governance concerns,
precipitating calls for increased regulation. This article provides an
overview of the evolving ICO market as it exists in November 2017
including the ICO process, roadmap, market conditions, crypto
economics for ICO startups, core risk factors for investors, and red
flags of ICO practices that require industry or regulatory
improvements.
Key Words: Initial Coin Offerings, Blockchain, Distributed Ledger
Technology, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Data
Science, Data Scientists, Innovation, Entrepreneur, Start-up, Big
Data, Crytpo Economics, Diversification, Optimization, Efficiency,
Governance, Bad Actors, Risk Factors, Regulation
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
* © 2017 Wulf A. Kaal. Associate Professor, University of Saint Thomas
School of Law and Director of the Private Investment Funds Institute,
Minneapolis. The author is grateful for outstanding research assistance from
librarians Nicole Catlin and Michael Robak.
** Post-Doctoral Fellow, Groningen Center for European Financial Services Law
(University of Groningen), Research Associate, LabEx ReFi (ENA, ESCP, Paris
I Panthéon-Sorbonne, CNAM).
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION ........................................................................... 2
II. INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS ........................................................... 5
1. Roadmap ................................................................................ 5
2. Market Environment .............................................................. 8
3. Crypto Economics .................................................................. 9
III. DISRUPTIVE EFFECTS ........................................................... 10
IV. RISK FACTORS ...................................................................... 14
1. Intangible or No Product ..................................................... 15
2. Early Liquidity Despite Little Information Creates High
Volatility ....................................................................................... 16
3. Open Source ......................................................................... 17
4. No Liquidity Preference ....................................................... 17
5. Legal Uncertainty ................................................................ 18
V. RED FLAGS ............................................................................... 19
VI. CONCLUSION ........................................................................ 20
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
I. Introduction
Initial Coin Offerings (ICOs) provide unprecedented
efficiency for capital formation in start-ups. ICOs offer liquidity
enhancement of start-up finance needs through crypto investors,
overcoming fundraising challenges for entrepreneurial initiatives.
ICOs allow crypto start-ups, financial technology start-ups, and
increasingly legacy system innovators, and the Ethereum developer
community, among others, to fundraise directly in the crypto
community for their activities and projects, bypassing both banking
and non-banking entities (i.e. Venture Capitalists) as well as their
services.
ICOs can be distinguished from initial public offerings
(IPOs). ICOs enable the sale of a stake in a crypto project that aims
to raise funds at an early stage of development.1 Unlike IPOs, where
companies sell stocks via regulated exchange platforms, ICOs sell
digital coupons, so-called “presale tokens” that do not generally
confer ownership rights,2 to early investors via unregulated or
exempt exchange platforms.3 Risks and rewards of tokens differ
from those of equity. Unlike token ownership, equity typically
conveys a right to dividends. In the case of bankruptcy, equity
owners have some claims on the assets of the company. Moreover,
unlike IPOs, successful ICOs do not require the support of a
reputable banking institution as underwriters and remove the
associated fees for the issuer. ICO fundraising is substantially less
expensive than traditional IPO fundraising because of the relative
1 ICOs offer to the public a fraction of initial supply in a new digital project in
the form of tokens, representing a fraction of a digital bitcoin-like cryptocurrency.
2 In an IPO, the user receives a share of ownership in the company. They usually
have rights to the profit in the form of dividends, rights to company direction in
the form of shareholder voting, etc. In an ICO, the user receives a token that
allows use of the token’s features. Instead of the ownership right itself, a token
offers discounts on cryptocurrency before they hit the exchanges once the ICO is
launched and, together with the stake in the company, a right to vote on future
decisions. Some ICOs provide for different categories of participations (or levels
of membership): voting members, founding member, third party service provider
member, asset gateway member.
3 The issuance of tokens occurs through an indelible distributed ledger in the form
of an organization’s cryptocurrency (clones of the bitcoin, created on a protocol
such as Counterparty, Ethereum, Openledger). These tokens create the capital
inflow required for the project finance, as they can be purchased online with fiat
currency or another digital currency at a predetermined exchange rate.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

absence of regulatory constraints and procedures in the ICO space,
in addition to simpler reporting requirements, coupled with a
systematic adoption of digital identity-based processes instead of
paperwork in all the phases of the process.
ICOs can also be distinguished from crowdfunding. Unlike
crowdfunding, ICOs involve a financial stake in the company
including, as the case may be, the right to vote on future decisions.
Therefore, ICOs cannot be qualified as a donation. Unlike any
campaigns conducted on crowdfunding sites such as Kickstarter,
ICOs often have an element of a speculative purpose or a particular
infrastructure use case developed on platforms and
cryptocurrencies.
ICOs are evolving rapidly. After Satoshi Nakamoto
established the use case for blockchain technology for
cryptocurrencies in 2008,4 it took until 2012 for the first ICO to
occur. However, the exponential growth of ICOs since 2015
culminated in ICO fundraising outperforming venture capital
financing of crypto start-ups in the second quarter of 2017.5
Several prominent ICOs help illustrate the rapid evolution
of the ICO market. In April 2016, the start-up Gnosis, a
decentralized prediction platform,6 raised around $12.5 million in
12 minutes, skipping any venture capital firm or wealthy investor
network.7 In May 2016, the start-up FirstBlood raised $5.5 million
in 2 minutes.8 Brave, a start-up developing a web browser via the
4 Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System (24 May
2009). https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf (PDF).
5 Sunnarborg, ICO Investments Pass VC Funding In Blockchain Market First,
Coindesk, 9 June 2017, https://www.coindesk.com/ico-investments-pass-vc-
funding-in-blockchain-market-first/ (last accessed 03.11.2017)
6 Hertig, Ethereum Prediction Market Project Gnosis Sets ICO Launch Date,
Coindesk, 5 April 2017, http://www.coindesk.com/ethereum-prediction-market-
project-gnosis-sets-ico-launch-date/ (last accessed 03.11.2017)
7 Vigna, How a Bitcoin Clone Helped a Company Raise $12 Million in 12
Minutes, Wall Street Journal Online, 17 May 2017,
https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-a-bitcoin-clone-helped-a-company-raise-12-
million-in-12-minutes-1495018802 (last accessed 03.11.2017); cf Chavez-
Dreyfuss, Blockchain Start-up Gnosis to Freeze Tokens After Strong Sale, 26
April 2017, http://www.reuters.com/article/us-blockchain-funding-gnosis-
idUSKBN17R2RD (last accessed 03.11.2017)
8 Redman, Decentralized eSports Platform FirstBlood Raises $5.5M in Minutes
26 September 2016, https://news.bitcoin.com/esports-firstblood-raises-5-5m/
(last accessed 03.11.2017)
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
so-called Basic Attention Tokens,9 raised $35.5 million in 30
seconds.10 In June 2016, the Bancor Foundation collected $153
million in three hours.11
Ethereum enabled a uniform protocol for the overwhelming
majority of ICOs. The most significant transformation in the ICOs
market to date, Ethereum’s decentralized platform incorporating
smart contracts12 allows developers to build applications on the
Ethereum blockchain.13 Given these advantages, the majority of
developers opted for writing smart contracts on the Ethereum
Virtual Machine rather than creating their own blockchain
9 Basic Attention Token, https://basicattentiontoken.org
10 Keane, $35 Million in 30 Seconds: Token Sale for Internet Browser Brave
Sells Out, Coindesk, 31 May 2017, http://www.coindesk.com/35-million-30-
seconds-token-sale-internet-browser-brave-sells/ (last accessed 03.11.2017); cf
Ingram, Start-up Raises $35 Million in 30 Seconds With Crypto Currency
Offering, Fortune, 1 June 2017, HTTP://FORTUNE.COM/2017/06/01/START-UP-
CRYPTO-CURRENCY/ (last accessed 03.11.2017); Eha, Web Pioneer Plans
Blockchain-Based Digital Ad Platform, 24 March 2017,
https://www.americanbanker.com/news/web-pioneer-plans-blockchain-based-
digital-ad-platform (last accessed 03.11.2017).
11 Wong, Ethereum Unleashed the “Initial Coin Offering” Craze, But It Can’t
Handle Its Insane Success, 15 June 2017, https://qz.com/1004892/the-bancor-
ico-just-raised-153-million-on-ethereum-in-three-hours/ (last accessed
03.11.2017).
12 Smart contracts (a term coined in 1994 by Nick Szabo) are pre-written logic
computer programs that can be impartially “executed by DLT itself” (by DLT
validating nodes): their coded terms, a set of pre-defined terms and execution
conditions, are agreed by all relevant parties. One or a series of specific events
trigger the transaction without relying on a central authority. They are executed
by transferring the value between the contract signing parties when the
transaction is triggered. See BlockGeeks, Smart Contracts: The Blockchain
Technology That Will Replace Lawyers,
http://blockgeeks.com/guides/smart-contracts/ (last visited 18.03.2017). See
also Szabo, Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public Networks, First
Monday, 2(9), 1 September 1997,
http://ojphi.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/548/469 (last visited 03.11.2017);
and Shadab, What Are Smart Contracts, and What Can We do with them?, 15
December 2014, CoinCenter, https://coincenter.org/entry/what-are-smart-
contracts-and-what-can-we-do-with-them (last visited 03.11.2017).
13 Kostinuk, Too Many Crypto Coin Crowd Sales Could Crowd Out True
Innovators, American Banker, 29 June 2016,
https://www.americanbanker.com/opinion/too-many-crypto-coin-crowd-sales-
could-crowd-out-true-innovators (last accessed 03.11.2017)
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

technology.14 Smart contracts automatically generate tokens when
receiving Ether (ETH).15
After introducing basic procedural steps for ICOs, the
emerging trends in the ICO market, and highlighting some of the
core problems with the market, the article outlines core challenges
for the ICO market, bad practices, and red flags.
II. Initial Coin Offerings
1. Roadmap
ICOs are a recent phenomenon that is constantly evolving.
Standard market practices for ICOs change, on average every
quarter. Yet, a structural pattern seems to emerge.16 ICOs vary but
often follow a timeline sequence of structural elements. Such
elements are explored below:
- Before the launch of an ICO, the underlying “project is
announced on cryptocurrency fora” (such as Bitcoin Talk,
Cryptocointalk, Reddit).
- The announcement is followed by an “executive summary”
to present the project to investors, thereby obtaining specific
comments of the project.
- “Comments on the project” are considered by the
management team / promoter when drafting a so-called
whitepaper17
- The “whitepaper” is the equivalent of an offering
memorandum that provides more detailed information about
the project with the purpose being to support potential
investors in their assessment of the project. 18
14 The Market in Initial Coin Offerings Risks Becoming a Bubble, The
Economist 413, 9034, 29 April 2017 (see image n. 1)
15 Ibid.
16 In the sense of the identification of four different phases, see Aitken,
Investment Guide To “Crypto” Coin Offerings Rating Blockchain Start-ups,
Forbes, 6 January 2017,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/rogeraitken/2017/01/06/investment-guide-to-
crypto-coin-offerings-rating-blockchain-start-ups/#614e6940121b (last accessed
03.11.2017).
17 Ibid, cf Fonseca, ICOs and Blockchain Token Funding, IntelligentHQ, 5 May
2017, https://www.intelligenthq.com/finance/icos-and-blockchain-token-
funding/ (last accessed 03.11.2017).
18 supra Aitken, 6 January 2017; and supra Fonseca, 5 May 2017.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
o Most important for the whitepaper are the key terms
and the investment approach, including the
investment strategy, criteria, restrictions, processes,
and returns
o Whitepapers are not audited by any authority.
Therefore these preliminary steps are crucial in order
to build a general market credibility and investors’
trust in the soundness of the project
- The draft of a “yellowpaper” provides the technical
specifications to support the project at this preliminary
phase.
- In a first stage, in a so-called “pre-ICO” a preliminary offer
is made to selected investors.
- After the signing of the offer, the “launch of the ICO is
announced” and a PR campaign addressed to a broader
segment of investors (typically including small investors)
begins. 19
- After this preliminary phase, the “ICO is launched”
o The new venture sells its own cryptocurrency to be
used with their software before the software itself is
even written20
o The better ICO companies may have a proof of
concept or an alpha version before starting the token
sale, and sometimes even a beta version as in the
case of Storj. 21
o Funds are typically collected in Bitcoin, either via a
global, public address (in which case the participants
need to send Bitcoin from an address for which they
control the private key) or by creating accounts of
each participant and providing them with a unique
Bitcoin address.
19 supra Aitken, 6 January 2017.
20 Finer, How Blockchain Start-ups Are Driving An Under-The-Radar
Fundraising Boom, VentureBeat, 13 November 2016,
https://venturebeat.com/2016/11/13/how-blockchain-start-ups-are-driving-an-
under-the-radar-fundraising-boom/ (last accessed 03.11.2017).
21 Bjorøy, Blockchain Fundings are Trendy, But We're Still in the Wild West
Days, VentureBeat 15 May 2017,
https://venturebeat.com/2017/05/14/blockchain-fundings-are-trendy-but-were-
still-in-the-wild-west-days/ (last accessed 03.11.2017).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

o ICO best practices suggest that all funds be held in a
multi-sig address made public. 22
o Fundraising (usually only one) happens before the
start-up has launched its project, however duration
of the ICOs may vary depending on the success of
the entrepreneurial initiative among the investors:
the most successful ICOs were concluded in a few
minutes.
- The digital tokens are “listed on cryptocurrency exchanges
for trading”. At the moment there are over forty exchanges
around the world that serve as secondary markets where
cryptocurrencies can be traded for bitcoins in an open
marketplace. 23
- A cryptocurrencies’ *”pre-ICO price” is arbitrarily
determined by the start-up team that structured the ICO, 24
whereas the post-ICO price dynamics are determined by
supply and demand. Instead of a central authority or
government in ICOs, the network of participants determines
the price: 25 Successful entrepreneurial activities increase
the price of the tokens, granting profitable returns to
investors.26 Should the start-up fail, the tokens’ price will
plummet.
22 Kalla, What is a Token Sale (ICO)?, Smith & Crown, 21 June 2016,
https://www.smithandcrown.com/what-is-an-ico/ (last accessed 03.11.2017).
23 Lea, Venture Capital 3.0: The Initial Coin Offering Explained, Financial
Review, 2 May 2017,http://www.afr.com/technology/venture-capital-30-the-
initial-coin-offering-explained-20170502-gvxhos (last accessed 03.11.2017).
24 Richard Kastelein, What Initial Coin Offerings Are, and Why VC Firms Care,
Harvard Business Review Online, 24 March 2017,
https://hbr.org/2017/03/what-initial-coin-offerings-are-and-why-vc-firms-care
(last accessed 03.11.2017).
25 Kastelein, What Initial Coin Offerings Are, and Why VC Firms Care,
Harvard Business Review Online, 24 March 2017,
https://hbr.org/2017/03/what-initial-coin-offerings-are-and-why-vc-firms-care
(last accessed 03.11.2017).
26 The Market in Initial Coin Offerings Risks Becoming a Bubble, The
Economist, 413, 9034, 29 April 2017; cf Dearing, Rule of Thumb For ICO
Investor: Explore Risks Involved, The CoinTelegraph, 9 June 2017,
https://cointelegraph.com/news/rule-of-thumb-for-ico-investor-explore-risks-
involved (last accessed 03.11.2017).
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
2. Market Environment
Several market factors significantly depressed fundraising
for start-ups before the ICO market materialized in 2012 and
accelerated in 2015. Banking regulation enacted in the aftermath of
the financial crisis of 2008-2009 affected the availability of
resources for small and medium enterprises (SMEs), making
fundraising for new entrepreneurial initiatives more difficult. Basel
III has further increased capital requirements and risk weighted
assets, resulting in a higher pressure on banks and their Return on
Equity (RoE).27 While this led to more prudent business practices,28
it also significantly constrained the financing instruments available
for SMEs and companies below-investment-grade.29 Moreover, the
emergence of shadow banking30 (e.g. traditional banking services
are provided by private investment funds, insurance companies,
crowdfunding, and peer-to-peer lending), only marginally support
the creation of new ventures and highly-innovative start-ups. ICOs’
rapid evolution was enabled in part by these negative factors that
affected start-up fundraising.
27 See European Banking Authority, Overview of the Potential Implications of
Regulatory Measures for Banks’ Business Models, 9 February 2015,
https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/974844/Report+-
+Overview+of+the+potential+implications+of+regulatory+measures+for+busin
ess+models.pdf/fd839715-ce6d-4f48-aa8d-0396ffc146b9 (PDF).
28 OECD, The Role of Banks, Equity Markets and Institutional Investors in
Long-Term Financing for Growth and Development, February 2013,
http://www.oecd.Org/finance/private-
pensions/G20reportltfinancingforgrowthrussianpresidency2013.pdf (PDF).
29 This resulted in increased banking disintermediation, e.g. corporations obtain
funding from sources other than banks, whether funding is provided from non-
bank lenders or by issuing bonds. Banking disintermediation has existed since
the 70s, when the competition between banks and non-banks led to a change in
the business of banking, See Whitehead, The Evolution of Debt Covenants, the
Credit Market, and Corporate Governance, Iowa J. Corp. L. 34 (2009) 641
(654). Banking disintermediation flourished in the aftermath of the last financial
crisis, with the emergence of the shadow banking system which provided a
significant amount of resources. See Bershidsky, Shadow Banking Is Getting
Bigger Without Getting Better, Bloomberg, 28 March 2017,
https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2017-03-28/shadow-banking-is-
getting-bigger-without-getting-better (last accessed 03.11.2017).
30 For a definition of shadow banking see Schwarcz, Regulating Shadow
Banking, Rev. of Banking and Fin. L. 31(1) (1 October 2012), 619 (620).
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

Given this market environment for start-up fundraising at
the inception of the ICO market, ICOs filled a void and enabled a
democratization and inclusion process that facilitated banking
disintermediation. ICOs allow start-ups to fundraise, bypassing
both banking and non-banking entities (e.g. VCs), as well as their
services. This allows unlocking an unprecedented level of liquidity
enabled by small investors who otherwise could not invest in highly
innovative ventures. The Argon Group,31 an investment bank
exclusively focused on cryptocurrencies and token-based capital
markets,32 illustrates this trend in the evolution of investment
banking services.
3. Crypto Economics
Monetary policy in crypto economics refers to the
interaction of token supply, token release, and the maximum
issuance of tokens in a given token issuance. An issuers’ ICOs
strategy can pre-define monetary policy by predetermining the fixed
number of tokens created and issued in the ICO. A maximum token
issuance in combination with controlled token supply releases can
result in small increases in demand driving token prices higher.
Several aspects related to the release mechanisms for tokens
help manage the supply of tokens in circulation. For instance,
escrow accounts can hold tokens that were not issued in the ICO.
Such escrowed tokens may be released for future issuance to
finance future projects of the issuer or support operational
financing. To avoid a token price crash, token escrow accounts
should provide usage and access controls that assure investors that
escrowed tokens will not be issued at a discount. Lockups of
escrowed tokens for a specified time period or phased releases can
also help minimize the risks of token price crashes.
The economic benefits token holders receive from holding
tokens are a key concept associated with quasi fiscal crypto policy.
Two central questions help illustrate this point: 1. What is the
underlying value of the issued tokens?, and 2. What factors
31 The Argon Group, https://argongroup.com/.
32 See Shin, This VC Is Sure Venture Capital Is About To Be Disrupted,
Fortune, 18 April 2017,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/laurashin/2017/04/18/this-vc-is-sure-venture-
capital-is-about-to-be-disrupted/#70739cc9324e (last accessed 03.11.2017)
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
contribute to the value appreciation or depreciation of the issued
tokens? For instance, linking commercial benefits such as discounts
and other benefits with token usage can incentivize token holders to
use the services etc. associated with a given token.
Several benefits are associated with the quasi fiscal tool of
adjusting commercial benefits of tokens in crypto economics. First,
the increase in commercial benefits associated with a token
heightens the aggregate demand of the given token supply. Second,
commercial benefits associated with a token issuance can help
offset depreciated supply scarcity, e.g. the effects of a large issuance
/ supply of a given token in circulation. Third, commercial benefits
associated with tokens can be adjusted as a form of quasi fiscal
policy to control the flow of tokens in a given issuance through
indirect economic incentives. Adjustments in commercial benefits
can help manage operational cost changes for the issuer and the
external competition with other token issuers experienced by the
issuer, among other factors. Fourth, adjusting the commercial
benefits associated with a given token issuance avoids more drastic
monetary policy intervention by way of emergency sales or building
token reserves or a decrease or increase of token supply in
circulation.
To create a more significant effect, the quasi fiscal policy
tool can be combined with monetary policy. If the aggregate
demand for a given token issuance increases through better
commercial benefits associated with the tokens, the issuer can
simultaneously increase the total supply in circulation. Options for
increasing the total supply of tokens in circulation include issuing
escrowed tokens or even secondary issuances. The combined effect
of quasi fiscal policy (increasing benefits associated with the
tokens) and monetary policy (increasing the token supply in
circulation) may or may not have an effect on the market price of
the respective tokens. The balance of commercial benefits of a
token offering and associated use cases of the token in combination
with supply scarcity is critical in the issuance of a token offering.
III. Disruptive Effects
ICOs have significant disruptive effects on finance. The
venture capital, start-ups, and banking institutions are affected by
the increasing prominence of ICOs in capital formation. The
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

reorganization of capital formation with a more efficient financing
tool and crypto currencies may also affect the economy as a whole.
In particular, the ICOs disrupt the traditional business model
of venture capital funds, an asset class that has traditionally played
a crucial role in financing highly innovative start-ups. The
disruptive effect of ICOs on the venture capital industry is in part
the result of the venture capital fund lacking innovation.
Paradoxically, venture capital funds continuously invested in
innovation, while insufficiently innovating themselves.33 In the
second quarter of 2017, ICO issuances exceeded venture capital
financing of start-ups for the first time,34 with $210 million invested
in ICOs versus $180 million invested into start-ups via traditional
venture capital funds. This trend can be expected to continue given
the superior allocation of capital at lower cost via ICOs.35
ICOs display several core characteristics that make them
preferable for many start-ups to the traditional venture capital
funding model. First and foremost, ICO promoters and their
developers are not forced to sacrifice their equity in the project in
exchange for the funds they raised.36 Through borderless online
sales, ICOs are directly marketed to a worldwide potential pool of
investors, bypassing the typical legal, jurisdictional, and business
hurdles in traditional venture capital financing.37 Moreover, ICOs
benefit from limited accreditation standards, as well as from
multiple global cryptocurrency exchanges that provide continuous
access to trading with significant liquidity.38
33 Guarda, The Cryptocurrency Economy: ICOs, Blockchain, Financial
Inclusion, Intelligent HQ, 3 May 2017,
https://www.intelligenthq.com/innovation-management/the-cryptocurrency-
economy-icos-blockchain-financial-inclusion/ (last accessed 03.11.2017).
34 See Sunnarborg, ICO Investments Pass VC Funding in Blockchain Market
First, Coindesk 9 June 2017, http://www.coindesk.com/ico-investments-pass-
vc-funding-in-blockchain-market-first/ (last accessed 03.11.2017).
35 Loizos, While Investment Firms Ponder ICOs, This Team is Barreling Ahead
With a $100 Million ICO Fund, TechCrunch, 28 June 2017,
https://techcrunch.com/2017/06/28/while-investment-firms-ponder-icos-this-
team-is-barreling-ahead-with-a-100-million-ico-fund/ (last accessed
03.11.2017).
36 supra Fonseca, 5 May 2017.
37 Ibid.
38 supra Sunnarborg, 9 June 2017.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
Capital formation via ICOs also disrupts the traditional
hierarchies in venture capital. Traditional venture capital funds
typically only allow a smaller group of elite investors to invest in
highly innovative projects generally unknown to the investing
public.39 By contrast, ICOs provide a much more inclusive option
for all investors. ICOs increase the diversity and the heterogeneity
of start-up funding.40 Because of the low barrier to entry and the
borderless nature of the online token sale, ICOs allow small
investors from all over the world to invest.41
ICOs facilitate faster capital formation for crypto start-ups.
By contrast with traditional venture capital financing, the inclusive
elements in combination with increased efficiencies, significant
simplification, and better timing of capital formation provided by
ICOs42 contributed to the creation of more liquid venture funds.43
Given these benefits, ICOs have the potential to disrupt other funds
and asset classes, including private equity and real estate funds.
Given the competitive elements of ICOs, the venture capital
industry is investigating ways to participate in the ICO market.
Venture capital funds increasingly try to capitalize on the
opportunities presented by ICOs. The disruption of legacy finance
by ICOs has triggered attempts by venture capital funds to capitalize
on the source of disruption within the existing business model to
benefit from its advantages.44 For instance, venture capital funds
can capitalize on the exponential growth of cryptocurrencies.
Cryptocurrencies created by blockchain start-ups generate
investment returns that cannot be matched by legacy investments.
For example, several cryptocurrencies such as Monero and NEM
39 Dinis Guarda, The Cryptocurrency Economy: ICOs, Blockchain, Financial
Inclusion, Intelligent HQ, 3 May 2017,
https://www.intelligenthq.com/innovation-management/the-cryptocurrency-
economy-icos-blockchain-financial-inclusion/ (last accessed 03.11.2017).
40 This may potentially increase volatility due to panic sales of unexperienced
investors.
41 supra Kostinuk, 29 June 2016.
42 supra Sunnarborg, 9 June 2017.
43 supra Guarda, 3 May 2017.
44 See Laurent, Want to be a VC? Just Flip a Bitcoin, Bloomberg Gadfly, 18
April 2017, https://www.bloomberg.com/gadfly/articles/2017-04-18/beating-vc-
funds-is-as-easy-as-flipping-a-bitcoin (last accessed 03.11.2017).
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

increased in value by 2,000%. Similarly, Ether increased by
2,000%45 in one year, and Litecoin more than the 900%.46
Venture capital funds can benefit from the early liquidity
provided by cryptocurrencies. In the existing venture capital model,
venture capital funds invest significant amounts of money in the
hope of finding the next unicorn start-up. This investment process
is subject to long, complex, and time intensive processes leading up
to a very late liquidity event in the form of an IPO or acquisition.
By contrast, ICOs provide liquidity to investors much faster and
allow venture capital funds to capitalize on existing profits early.47
Venture capital funds who invested in crypto start-ups gain access
to much earlier liquidity via ICOs by converting their
cryptocurrency profits into Bitcoin or Ether through any of the
cryptocurrency exchanges and can thereafter transfer into fiat
currencies via online services such as Coinsbank or Coinbase.48
Blockchain Capital provides a prominent example of
venture capital funds’ attempts to capitalize on the benefits
associated with blockchain technology and ICOs within the venture
capital industry. After the release of an offering memorandum on
April 3, 2017,49 the ICO for the Blockchain Capital III Digital
Liquid Venture Fund50 was launched on April 10. Blockchain
Capital’s ICO campaign was intended to raise 20 percent of the
firm's next fund. The ICO raised $10 million in six hours,51
unlocking unprecedented liquidity in previously illiquid secondary
45 See Coinbase, https://www.coinbase.com/ price at July 3, 2017,
46 See Coinbase, https://www.coinbase.com/ price at July 3, 2017.
47 Richard Kastelein, What Initial Coin Offerings Are and Why VC Firms Care,
Harvard Business Review, 24 March 2017, https://hbr.org/2017/03/what-initial-
coin-offerings-are-and-why-vc-firms-care (last accessed 03.11.2017)
48 Coinbank, https://coinsbank.com/; Coinbase, https://www.coinbase.com/;
supra Kastelein, 24 March 2017.
49 Eha, Blockchain VC to raise fund through digital token offering, American
Banker, 17 March 2017, https://www.americanbanker.com/news/blockchain-vc-
to-raise-fund-through-digital-token-offering (last accessed 03.11.2017).
50 Blockchain Capital Liquid Venture Fund,
https://blockchaincapital.tokenhub.com/.
51 Kastelein, Global Blockchain Innovation: U.S. Lags, Europe and China Lead,
VentureBeat, 16 April 2017, https://venturebeat.com/2017/04/16/global-
blockchain-innovation-u-s-lags-europe-and-china-lead/ (last accessed
03.11.2017).
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
venture markets.52 Blockchain Capital’s ICO was the first know
your customer (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) compliant
crowdsale. The entity that engaged in the ICO was incorporated in
Singapore. Under applicable Regulation S and D exemptions,53 the
ICO was able to raise money from both international and domestic
investors.54
In summary, ICOs’ comparative advantage over venture
capital funds consists mainly of their highly cost-effective capital
formation capabilities in the emerging crypto marketplaces that
operates according to highly complex yet unpredictable economic
dynamics. Given these ICO advantages, traditional regulated IPOs
and venture capital funds increasingly fail to adequately capitalize
crypto and legacy ventures driven by new economic paradigms.
IV. Risk Factors
Several risk factors associated with ICOs affect investors.
First and foremost, the 2012-2017 ICO models allowed
cryptocurrencies to be raised via a token sale without any
conditions, landmark requirements, or security measures to protect
investors. Investors’ deposit of a cryptocurrency for a crypto
platform in exchange for tokens that provided a right to use the
platform associated crypto product in the future did not provide
such investors with any, or very limited influence over, how such
funds were used by the ICO promoters. While most issuers
typically established a form of a foundation or basic contracting to
supervise promoter use of ICO proceeds, the traditional ICO model,
52 Blockchain Capital, Industry Thought Leaders Invest With Blockchain
Capital in its Ground-Breaking ICO, PR Newswire, 7 April 2017,
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/industry-thought-leaders-invest-
with-blockchain-capital-in-its-ground-breaking-ico-300436544.html (last
accessed 03.11.2017).
53 See 17 C.F.R. § 230.500 (2013) (Regulation D. Rules Governing the Limited
Offer and Sale of Securities Without Registration Under the Securities Act of
1933) and 17 C.F.R. § 230.901 (1008) (Regulation S. Rules Governing Offers
and Sales Made Outside the United States Without Registration Under the
Securities Act of 1933).
54 With only 99 accredited American investors and the other 901 overseas
investors that did not have to meet any income or net worth requirement, but
had to submit documents satisfying the KYC regulations. See supra
Blockchain Capital, 7 April 2017; supra Shin,18 April 2017.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

in essence, allowed the promoters / issuer to do with the ICO
proceeds as they pleased. Further limitations for token holders that
amount to significant risk factors include token holders’ inability,
unlike shareholders in the traditional infrastructure, to vote for or
against directors or to nominate directors. While institutional
investors may be able to influence the promoter decisions in the ICO
pre-sale, actual ICO investors typically don’t have such influence
and simply need to trust the promoters and their business intent. The
only real control power for token holders is their decision to hold or
sell their tokens and even that may be limited until the token is fully
listed on an exchange.
1. Intangible or No Product
Crypto platform issuances of tokens provide an intangible,
or no, product. During the lifecycle of a crypto platform, the
platform typically starts the ICO when it has an intangible product
based on a basic crypto idea, but typically with no product that can
be associated with such idea. Accordingly, token holders typically
invest in the future promise of the idea associated with the platform.
While that works well with core infrastructure products such as
Ethereum, most other platforms struggle to fulfill that promise.
Associated with the lack of an existing product is the
inability of most crypto platforms to generate revenue to offset costs
like traditional businesses. While most crypto platform businesses
in the form of a foundation may be equipped to pay their developers,
crypto platforms typically do not have employees in the traditional
sense that create and advertise the platform product. Similarly,
while the creation of the crypto platform is associated with
significant costs, crypto businesses typically do not have customers
that create revenue for the business to pay for such costs. Cost
associated with running a crypto platform can include the
foundation itself, its developers, and the crypto marketing team,
among others.
Because of the lacking product and no revenue to offset
costs, ICO revenue raised by crypto platforms are often required to
last for the lifecycle of the platform. Accordingly, crypto platforms
are required to set aside a large number of tokens for future funding
needs. Because the token supply is controlled by the ICO promoters,
the token holders may be diluted in the future if the platform decides
to issue more reserve tokens to additional investors. Increasing the
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
supply of platform tokens to satisfy future funding needs and the
resulting dilution because demand for the tokens decreases if supply
increases means that token holder’s token value can be diminished
without their ability to protect themselves against such events. The
only real control token holders have to protect themselves is to sell
their tokens post-ICO. In fact, many venture capital funds that
received tokens in exchange for their pre-ICO investments often
quickly sell their tokens to protect themselves against devaluation.
Other means of protection against such supply side induced
devaluation of tokens can include hardcoded lockup periods for
tokens. However, while such lockup periods may protect token
holders against dilution, it also decreases much needed token
economic flexibility for the promoter team to raise additional funds
when needed.
2. Early Liquidity Despite Little Information Creates High
Volatility
ICOs provide unprecedented liquidity without sufficient
information resulting in high volatility. Unlike any prior financing
vehicles, ICOs provide the highest possible liquidity for investors.
Unlike typical legacy businesses that mature over time, increased
available information pertaining to the business which eventually
leads to a liquidity event such as an initial public offering, ICOs
provide a liquidity event for promoters and investors alike at a very
early stage in the lifecycle of the platform. Legacy businesses that
experience liquidity events for promoters and institutional investors
have been subject to reporting requirements under the federal
securities laws, accounting standards, legal infrastructure
requirements, among many other requirements for several years if
not decades, before they can experience a liquidity event. Because
of these requirements, the investing public gets significant
assurances of the underlying business success of the entity which
drives demand. Because ICOs typically take place at the beginning
of the lifecycle of a crypto business/platform, ICO investors
typically invest - and the token exchange - on very limited
information which increases volatility of the tokens and the entire
cryptocurrency market. Accordingly, ICOs and cryptocurrencies
are a much riskier investment. Their riskiness may, however, be
offset by the near unlimited use cases for blockchain technology.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

3. Open Source
Crypto businesses use typically open source code which
creates risk factors not associated with legacy businesses. Most
token offerings are based on open-source software. While it is
possible to consider a token issuance with a closed system, such
closed binary creates significant security concerns. By contrast, the
open source code and all its features can be copied at any time.
Accordingly, the utility of a token that was issued to investors can
at any time be recreated in another token with the same or
essentially the same features at marginal costs. Investors cannot rely
on the implicit promise that the token promoters and their
developers will increase the value of the acquired token and not
create another token with identical features. Starting another token
with the same features entails rather limited financial penalties.
Moreover, if a given token offering was very successful, other
promoters may have incentives to copy the token and its features. A
concrete example of this risk is provided by Stellar. Stellar is, in
essence, a copy of Ripple with almost identical features.55 While
open-source crypto start-ups have licenses that help protect them
from competitor companies who may be using their code for profit,
legacy businesses that own their code and can sue competitors who
copy such code which provides a different incentive structure and
makes ICO investments riskier.
4. No Liquidity Preference
In the case of bankruptcy or termination of the promoter’s
business / the platform token investors invested in, token holders
typically do not have a liquidity preference. After the debt holders
and outside creditors were satisfied with the liquidation value of the
corporation, token holders typically have no recourse at all. By
contrast, in a typical venture capital seed stage investment, the
venture capital fund should typically obtain at least a simple
liquidity preference, e.g. the venture capital fund typically will be
able to reclaim their initial seed investment before other claims will
be paid. Some venture capital funds can get more than their initial
investment back, depending on the agreement and other factors they
55 Buntinx, Ripple vs. Stellar, Coindesk, 10 May 2017,
https://themerkle.com/ripple-vs-stellar/ (last accessed 07.11.2017).
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
may obtain a 1.5 or 2 times liquidity preference. Again, by contrast,
token holders typically lose everything they invested as they have
no liquidity preference at all.
5. Legal Uncertainty
The lack of a regulatory framework creates significant legal
uncertainty in the ICO market. Moreover, cryptocurrencies are
censorship-resistant and arguably regulation-resistant by design,56
leading some to argue that regulatory uncertainty associated with
coin offerings may sooner or later lead the Securities and Exchange
Commission to declare ICOs illegal.57 Token valuation is also
largely uncertain and subject to incalculable risks.58
ICOs are not subject to predefined regulatory procedures.
Whitepapers do not follow prospectus disclosure guidelines, are not
reviewed or unaudited by any authorities and are not subject to any
forms of rating of the new entrepreneurial initiatives. To combat
these shortcomings, a private initiative, a joint-venture between
Ambisafe Inc.59 and the Russian-based rating agency ICOrating,60
has been created to ensure high-quality standards, supporting
investors in their due-diligence and identify potential opportunities
of investment in cryptocurrencies.61 The parameters to evaluate the
entrepreneurial initiatives take into account different indicators that
span from economic and financial parameters to more technical
elements.62
56 supra Aitken, 6 January 2017,
57 Scher, ICOs and Appcoins: A Blockchain VC's View, Coindesk, 4 November
2016, http://www.coindesk.com/icos-appcoins-blockchain-vcs-view/ (last
accessed 07.11.2017).
58 Ibid. “Founders with ideas that would struggle to raise a $500,000 seed round
from experienced venture capital funds are raising millions in token sales. Some
may view this as a good thing, with entrepreneurs able to cut out the elitist VC
gatekeepers and get voluntarily funded by perfectly sovereign individuals who
understand the entrepreneur's vision. I view it as a sign that the market is out of
whack”.
59 Ambisafe Inc., https://www.ambisafe.co/.
60 ICOrating, http://icorating.com/.
61 supra Aitken, 6 January 2017.
62 Four categories are identified ranging from the “Investment level”, the top
rated investment, to riskier “Speculative level”, to “red flags” investments,
“Non-investment level”, and “Default level” Among these parameters,
ICOrating explicitly mentions (http://icorating.com/rating): “the scale of the
problems addressed by the project, level of competition, quality of the project’s
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

To provide support for crypto investors, companies like
Deloitte and Price Waterhouse Cooper have built specific expertise
in the identification of vulnerabilities within the code and the
business model of start-ups.63 Identifying legitimate projects,
distinguishing them from scams, is vital to pursue investors’
protection while creating the conditions for ICOs to proliferate.
Bitcoin’s and Ethereum’s founding characteristics of
decentralization, independence, openness and consensus based on
proof of work provide a relatively easy way to identify scams.64
V. Red Flags
“Zombie ICOs” are ICOs that really have little chance of
creating a successful market for their tokens. Such ICOs have
become increasingly common in 2017. Zombie ICOs often cannot
succinctly answer core questions in their whitepaper or in response
to questions by possible investors. Their inability to respond to
legitimate questions often involves addressing issues such as the
core business and infrastructure problem the investment proposition
solves, allocation of ICO proceeds towards building the underlying
product, most viable products or pre-production solution,
availability of underlying assets. Moreover, business plans of
Zombie ICOs often cannot clearly articulate how the product of the
respective company works or why the investing public and
customers should care about it. Zombie ICO teams also often do not
have sufficient experience in starting and running a business.
Finally, investors often do not obtain sufficient information for their
investment decision in the respective ICO.
roadmap, quality of the project’s financial plan, the technical side of the
project’s level of development, details of the ICO, the team’s professionalism,
marketing”. ICOrating, http://icorating.com/rating.
63 Wambua, Five Crucial Things To Look At Before Investing In Initial Coin
Offerings (ICOs), Benzinga, 4 May 2017,
https://www.benzinga.com/general/17/05/9404395/five-crucial-things-to-look-
at-before-investing-in-initial-coin-offerings-icos (last accessed 07.11.2017).
64 Torpey, Attorney Pamela Morgan Explores Initial Coin Offerings from a
Legal Perspective, Bitcoin Magazine, 21 April 21 2017,
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/attorney-pamela-morgan-explores-initial-
coin-offerings-legal-perspective/ (last accessed 07.11.2017).
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

INITIAL COIN OFFERINGS
Core Problems with ICOs in 2017 can be narrowed down to
several uniformly identified bad practices. First, ICOs that propose
uncapped raises without an underlying product constitute a very
serious red flag for any investor. Uncapped ICOs have several
disadvantages. First, promoters who engage in uncapped raises are
often perceived by the crypto community as greedy. Second, for
crypto investors, uncapped ICOs raise the uncertainty for investors
about the valuation of the underlying platform / product there are
buying with their investment.
Because of such concerns, capped token issuances became
the dominant structure between 2016 and 2017. Capped sales
increase the likelihood for the ICO promoters that the ICO will be
oversubscribed, creating a significant incentive for investors to
attempt to get in first. Examples include the token issuances Blood
and BAT. With regard to the former, an amount of tokens equal to
$ 5.5 million was sold in two minutes, whereas in the latter $35
million were sold in 30 seconds. The Gnosis ICO ($ 12.5 million)
was another landmark in the structural evolution of ICOs. To
mitigate the inefficiencies and the risks of a capped sale, the Gnosis
ICO was structured as a reverse dutch auction, i.e. not only the ICO
was capped to $12.5 million, but in addition the time necessary to
complete the sale impacted the quantity of tokens distributed among
the investors, with the rest held by the start-up team.
ICO promoters should avoid several emerging bad ICO
practices. Such practices include allowing tokens to be traded
before underlying protocol network or application is live, using a
landing page that focuses almost exclusively on the ICO with
project timeline etc. but provides less content on product, project,
technology, and team. Moreover, ICO promoters should include
significant and ongoing disclosures on vesting and lockup periods,
should never manipulate the smart contract to change ICO sales
rules mid-course during the ICO. Moreover, the ICO disclosures
have to be as clear as possible and should avoid an unclear or
uncertain use of proceeds pie chart and should be very clear on
cryptocurrency conversion plans into actual company reserves.
Finally, ICO promoters should always disclose changes in company
via 10k 10q 8k equivalence.
VI. Conclusion
ICO practices will continue to evolve and improve the
capital formation for crypto startups. Bad practices in ICOs will over
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

time be curtailed via voluntary or mandated industry practices.
Through ICOs’ evolution and continuous practice improvements,
the ICO industry and underlying crypto businesses can become the
foundation of the emerging crypto economy.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3067615

