2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR AGENCY PROBLEMS IN
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
WULF A. KAAL*
Forthcoming in: ECONOMIC INFORMATION TO FACILITATE DECISION
MAKING, EDITED BOOK, EDITOR- KASHI R. BALACHANDRAN, WORLD
SCIENTIFIC PUBLISHERS (2019).
Abstract
As a foundational technology, blockchain technology creates the
infrastructure for decentralized networked governance that, over time,
creates the environment that enables the removal of internal and
external monitoring mechanisms previously necessitated by agency
problems in corporate governance. Blockchain technology facilitates
a substantial increase in efficiency in the agency relationship and
lowers agency costs in orders of magnitude.
Key Words: Agency, Principal-Agent, Blockchain, Technology,
Agency Cost, Monitoring, Corporate Governance, Blockchain,
Distributed Ledger Technology, Emerging Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
* (c) 2019 Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law
(Minneapolis, USA).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................... 3
II. AGENCY PROBLEMS IN CORPORATE GOVERNANCE .................................... 4
1. Remedial Attempts ................................................................................ 7
2. Path Dependencies ............................................................................. 12
III. BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR AGENCY PROBLEMS IN CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE ................................................................................................ 13
1. Blockchain Guarantees ....................................................................... 13
2. Removal of Agents .............................................................................. 17
3. Reforming Governance Hierarchies .................................................... 19
4. Agency Reform ................................................................................... 22
IV. OPEN ISSUES ....................................................................................... 23
V. CONCLUSION ...................................................................................... 25
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
I. Introduction
Agency theory is still today the leading theory for governance
conflicts between shareholders, corporate managers, and debt
holders.1 A vast literature attempts to explain the nature of the agency
conflicts in corporate governance and possible ways to resolve such
conflicts.2 However, the core agency conflicts emanating from the
separation of ownership (shareholder principal) and control (manager
agent) cannot be fully addressed by the existing theoretical and legal
framework. Attempts to monitor agents is inevitably costly and
transaction costs abound.
This book chapter adds to that literature and highlights the evolving
solutions offered by blockchain technology. The scope and scale of
agency problems in corporate governance can become more
adequately manageable over time.
It is important to note that any use of blockchain technology in a
corporate governance context necessitates the evolution of blockchain
technology. Such evolution is subject to several factors. Similar to the
internet itself and perhaps even comparable to electricity, blockchain
technology is not a disruptive technology, it is a foundational
technology whose transformational impact takes decades rather than
years. The use cases of blockchain technology involve most complex
1 Michael C. Jensen & William H. Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behaviour, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure, 3 J. Fin. Econ. 305 (1976).
2 For an overview of the relevant literature Andrei Shleifer & Robert W. Vishny, A
Survey of Corporate Governance, 737 J. Fin. 737 (1997).
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
structures that are all interdependent. In other words, development of
one area alone cannot be successful as the existence of multiple
additional support structures are needed. By way of comparison, the
use of electricity necessitated wiring and light bulbs, connectors,
generators etc. One cannot exist without the others being in place.
Even if the infrastructure elements are being developed in any of the
major areas of use cases for blockchain technology complex
discussions around structural changes are needed before the
technology can be applied.
The complexity of blockchain technology and its evolving
characteristics and use cases also impacts its ability to serve in a
corporate governance role. More specifically, in the corporate
governance context it requires the authorities, who most likely
understand the use case and not the technology, to come to a consensus
on how and when to implement such technology for that governance
use case.
II. Agency Problems in Corporate Governance
Agency problems originate from the lacking trust between principals
and agents. The agency relationship can be defined as a contract
between principal and agent whereby the agent acts on principals’
behalf because principal delegated a modicum of decision-making
authority to the agent.3 Because of the delegated authority, the agents’
3 Jensen and Meckling, supra note 1.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
decisions affect both the agents’ welfare and the principals’ welfare.
The agency model at its very basic level suggests that information
asymmetries between the principal and the agent and agents’
opportunistic behavior resulting from self-interest leads to principals’
lacking trust in agents. Because of bounded rationality, incomplete
foresight, and information asymmetries between principal and agent,4
it is impossible for principals to contract for every possible action or
inaction of the agent in order to induce the agent to act in the best
interests of the principal.5
The lacking trust in the agent’s performance of her duties creates the
underlying problems in corporate governance. Despite best efforts at
monitoring and bonding, the interest of manager agents and
shareholder principals in corporate governance are never fully aligned
and agency losses inevitably arise from conflicts of interest between
principals and agents, known as residual loss. Residual loss arises
because the cost of enforcing suboptimal contracts between principals
and agents always exceed the benefits of performing the contractual
obligations.
Agency costs arise because the principal attempts to control, monitor,
and supervise the agent. As a result of lacking trust in the integrity of
the principal agent relationship, and in an attempt to minimize
4 Wulf A. Kaal, Evolution of Law: Dynamic Regulation in a New Institutional
Economics Framework, in FESTSCHRIFT ZU EHREN VON CHRISTIAN KIRCHNER
(Wulf A. Kaal & Schmidt M. Schwartze eds., 2014).
5 Michael J. Brennan, Corporate Finance Over the Past 25 Years, 24 FIN. MGMT.
9 (1995).
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
information asymmetries, principals are forced to put into place costly
mechanisms to align their interest with those of the agents. Most
prominently, such control mechanisms involve periodic reporting,
compensation structures for agents, bonding, among others. In the
corporate context, agency costs can be seen as the lost value to
shareholders (loss in corporation’s share price) that results from
diverging interests between shareholders (principal) and corporate
managers (agents). As such, agency costs are the sum of monitoring
costs, bonding costs, and residual loss.6
Monitoring costs are costs to the principal resulting from observing,
measuring, and controlling an agent’s behavior. Monitoring costs can
include the cost of audits, executing executive compensation
contracts, and cost of hiring/firing manager agents. While such
monitoring costs are generally paid by the principal, agents may be
responsible for such costs as well because agents’ compensation is
subject to adjustments to cover monitoring costs.7
Bonding costs are the cost of establishing and adhering to system
structures that allow agents to act in shareholder principal’s best
interests or compensate shareholder principals appropriately if agents
do not act in their best interest. While bonding costs are typically paid
by the agents, they may in addition to financial costs include the cost
of increased disclosures to shareholder principals. If the marginal
6 Jensen & Meckling, supra note 1.
7 Eugene F. Fama & Michael C. Jensen, Separation of Ownership and Control,
88 J.L. & ECON. 301 (1983).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
reduction in monitoring equals the marginal increase in bonding costs,
agents no longer incur bonding costs.
The agency relationship in modern finance and corporate governance
is characterized by attempts to optimize incentives between principals
and agents, control costs, minimize information asymmetries, control
adverse selection and moral hazard, optimize risk preferences between
principals and agents, and engage in monitoring.
1. Remedial Attempts
Centralization around well-established principal-agent hierarchies in
corporations defines the existing corporate governance structure.8
Such governance hierarchy and the associated governance structures
revolve around authority, responsibility and control flows with the
investors at the epicenter of that hierarchy,9 particularly the minority
investors.10
The dominant corporate governance solution for the agency problem
today focuses on shareholder value maximization.11 Implementation
8 Ion Ivan et al., Requirements for Corporate Governance Assessment Based on
Ontologies, 15 Econ. Informatics 49, 49 (2015); Mark Fenwick & Erik P.M.
Vermeulen, The Future of Capitalism: “Un-Corporating” Coprorate Governance,
(Lex Research Topics in Corp. Law & Econ., Working Paper No. 2016-4, 2016),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2795042.
9 ICSA: THE GOVERNANCE INSTITUTE, What is Corporate Governance?,
https://www.icsa.org.uk/about-us/policy/what-is-corporate-governance, (last visited
Apr. 16, 2019).
10 Rafael Law Porta et al., Investor Protection and Corporate Governance 2 (2000)
(unpublished article), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=183908.
11 According to the dominant view, the goal of a firm should be to increase the
financial interests of the investors and by doing so the firm can maximize
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
of the shareholder primacy doctrine results mostly in measures that
aim at aligning the interests of all of the other actors/stakeholders
within those of the investor-shareholders.12 Thus, reducing the risk of
managerial misbehavior.13 If management acts opportunistically at the
expense of shareholder value, the associated firm underperformance
and possible bankruptcy harms all stakeholders. 14 Conversely, by
aligning the interests and incentives of the various actors with those of
the investor-shareholders, the resulting increase in firm performance
— as measured by the share price — benefits all of the stakeholders
in a firm, as well as the public who benefit from the goods and services
opportunities to be successful. Stephen M. Bainbridge, Director v. Shareholder
Primacy in the Convergence Debate, 16 TRANSNAT’L LAW. 45 (2002), available at
https://scholarlycommons.pacific.edu/globe/vol16/iss1/5. Please CITE all in
this debate with short summaries of their main points – there are many papers that
summarize the debate with full citations to the debate participants. Make Marin,
The Crisis of Shareholder Primacy, RESEARCH AT CAMBRIDGE (Mar. 19, 2012),
http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/discussion/the-crisis-of-shareholder-primacy; H.
Jeff Smith, The Shareholders vs. Stakeholders Debate, MITSLOAN MGMT REV.
(July 15, 2003), http://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/the-shareholders-vs-
stakeholders-debate/; Lynn A. Stout, The Shareholder Value Myth (Cornell Law
Faculty Publications, Paper 771, 2013),
https://scholarship.law.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?referer=&httpsredir=1&arti
cle=2311&context=facpub.
http://scholarship.law.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2311&context=facp
ub
12 N. Craig Smith & David Ronnergard, Shareholder Primacy, Corporate Social
Responsibility, and the Role of Business Schools, 134 J. BUS. ETHICS 463 (2016).
13 Alessio M. Pacces, RETHINKING CORPORATE GOVERNANCE: THE LAW AND
ECONOMICS OF CONTROL POWERS (2013).
14 Maria Maher & Thomas Andersson, Corporate Governance: Effects on Firm
Performance and Economic Growth, ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-
OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT 7 (1999),
https://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/2090569.pdf; David Larrabee, Maximization of
Shareholder Value: Flawed Thinking That Threatens
Our Economic Future, ENTERPRISING INV. (Sept. 24, 2014), https://blogs.cfainstitu
te.org/investor/2014/09/24/maximization-of-shareholder-value-flawed-thinking-
that-threatens-our-economic-future/.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
that a successful firm provides.15 Following this logic, increasing
shareholder control over other actors within the firm has become the
primary goal of corporate governance rules.16 The correct corporate
governance is seen as naturally resulting in shareholder value.17
While the shareholder value approach to governance and many other
attempts at optimizing corporate governance and addressing the
agency problems in corporate governance helped optimize the agency
problems, many examples suggest that the core underlying agency
problems cannot fully be resolved within the existing theoretical and
legal infrastructure.
A standard approach for effective corporate governance involved
outside independent directors on corporate boards who hold
managerial positions in other companies, thus separating the problems
of decision management and decision control.18 However, CEOs who
often dominate the board make the separation of these functions much
more difficult, which hurts shareholders. Furthermore, outside
directors’ separation of decision management and decision control
depends on their concern over reputation as an incentive, which is
15 Stout, supra note 11 (Discussing residual claimants arguments and potential
benefits to society through the company); see also Smith, supra note 12.
16 Justin Fox & Jay W. Lorsch, What Good Are Shareholders, HARV. BUS. REV.
(Jul.-Aug. 2012), https://hbr.org/2012/07/what-good-are-shareholders;
17 Id.; Margaret
M. Blair, Shareholder Value, Corporate Governance, and Corporate
Performance: A Post- Enron Reassessment of the Conventional Wisdom, in
CORPRATE GOVERNANCE AND CAPITAL FLOWS IN A GLOBAL ECONOMY 53-82
(P.K. Cornelius & B. Kogut eds., Oxford University Press 2003).
18 Fama & Jensen, supra note 7.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
insufficient in most cases.
Another much touted governance mechanism for firms involved
firms’ capital structures with emphasis on higher debt levels. Higher
levels of insider ownership by increasing debt and reducing equity19
in the firm’s capital structure acts as a bonding mechanism for
manager agents.20 Management by issuing debt rather than paying
dividends creates contractual obligations to pay out future cash flows
in ways unattainable through dividends. Debt financing can also help
create external capital market monitoring which incentivizes
managers’ avoidance of personal utility maximization and increases
value maximizing strategies for shareholders.21
In an effort to curtail the inevitable instability that is a by-product of
the pervasive agency problem in the corporate governance system,22
governments have responded to corporate governance scandals by
adopting a number of regulatory changes. Such changes include
substantively increased disclosure requirements.23 Shareholder
19 Jensen & Meckling, supra note 1.
20 Michael C. Jensen, Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and
Takeovers, 76 Am. Econ. Rev. 323 (1986).
21 Frank H. Easterbrook, Two Agency Cost Explanations of Dividends, 74 Am. Econ.
Rev. 650 (1984).
22 Mark J. Roe, The Inevitable Instability of American Corporate Governance, in
RESTORING TRUST IN AMERICAN BUSINESS (American Academy of Arts and
Sciences eds., 2004).
23 Benjamin E. Hermalin & Michael S. Weisbach, Transparency and Corporate
Governance (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. w12875, 2007),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=958628; Fenwick & Vermeulen, supra note 8 (“The
political response to corporate scandals has been the introduction of more regulation.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
activism reform by itself has been unable to sufficiently improve the
corporate governance system.24 Upgrading the U.S. proxy system has
been another government priority.25 Changes in executive
compensation has been another approach to address the instability of
the existing corporate governance system.26 Government-sponsored
In a US context, for instance, “Sarbanes-Oxley” and “Dodd-Frank” function as
shorthand for these new swathes of legal rules, but such a trend can be found
everywhere. The inevitable result has been the emergence of a regulatory landscape
that requires large modern corporations to make a much more significant investment
in compliance and the management of legal risk.”).
24 Stephen M. Bainbridge, Shareholder Activism and Institutional Investors (UCLA
Sch. of Law Pub. Law-Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 05-20, 2005),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=796227; Jonathan M. Karpoff, The Impact of Shareholder
Activism on Target Companies: A Survey of Empirical Findings (2001), https://ssr
n.com/abstract=885365 (“[T]he disagreement among researchers is more apparent
than real. Most evidence indicates that shareholder activism can prompt small
changes in target firms’ governance structures, but has negligible impacts on share
values and earnings.”); Roberta Romano, Less Is More: Making Shareholder
Activism A Valued Mechanism Of Corporate Governance (Yale Law & Econ.,
Research Paper No. 241; Yale ICF, Working Paper No. 00-10; Yale SOM,
Working Paper No. ICF- 00- 10) (2000), https://ssrn.com/abstract=218650 (“The
finance literature presents an apparent paradox: Notwithstanding commentators'
generally positive assessment of the development of such shareholder activism, the
empirical studies suggest that it has an insignificant effect on targeted firms'
performance. Very few find evidence of a positive impact, and some even find a
significant negative stock price effect from activism.”); John C. Coffee Jr., Liquidity
Versus Control: The Institutional Investor as Corporate Monitor, 91 COLUM. L.
REV. 1277 (1991).
25 The existing U.S. proxy system lacks transparency; has few accountability
mechanisms; is complex and costly; tolerates record-keeping inaccuracies partially
because it provides no audit trail; and produces voting results that cannot be verified.
John C. Wilcox, Shareholder Nominations of Corporate Directors: Unintended
Consequences and the Case for Reform of the u.S. Proxy System, in SHAREHOLDER
ACCESS TO THE CORPORATE BALLOT (Lucian Bebchuck, ed. 2005); Henry T. C. Hu
& Bernard S. Black, The New Vote Buying: Empty Voting and Hidden (Morphable)
Ownership, 79 S. CALIF. L. REV. 811, 811 (2006);
David Yermack, Shareholder Voting and Corporate Governance,
2 Ann. Rev. Fin. Econ. 103 (2010).
26 Lucian A. Bebchuk & Jesse M. Fried, Executive Compensation as an Agency
Problem, 17 J. Econ. Persp. 71-92 (2003); Lucian A. Bebchuk et al., The Wages of
Failure: Executive Compensation at Bear Stearns and Lehman 2000-2008, 27 YALE
J. ON REG. 257-282 (2010); Roe, supra note 22.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
organizational experimentation that enables new business models and
new organizational structures is desirable and valuable and may be one
of the few ways to facilitate the much needed corporate governance
reform.27
2. Path Dependencies
Despite the unresolved substantive problems associated with the
division of ownership (shareholders) and control (agent),28 the
corporate form with the diffused share ownership that leads to such
conflicts, and the incomplete and suboptimal rules that govern such
conflicts, remains the most popular form of a governance mechanism.
The popularity of existing mechanisms to address the agency
problems in corporate governance may be related to path
dependencies created by the evolution of internal and external
monitoring mechanisms in corporate governance and the evolution of
governance mechanisms designed to limit the scope of agency
problems, instituted to address the agency problems in corporate
governance.
Existing universal governance solutions are often ineffective because
27 Bengt R. Holmström & Steven N. Kaplan, The State of U.S. Corporate
Governance: What's Right and What's Wrong? (ECGI – Fin., Working Paper No.
23/2003, 2003), https://ssrn.com/abstract=441100.
28 Roe, supra note 22 (“The core fissure in American corporate governance is the
separation of ownership from control—distant and diffuse stockholders, with
concentrated management—a separation that creates both great efficiencies and
recurring breakdowns.”).
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
agency conflicts and the specific scope of agency conflicts differ
across firms. Governance mechanisms and the effectiveness of
governance mechanisms in reducing agency conflicts in firms differ
from firm to firm. Each type of governance mechanism and
combinations of governance mechanisms can help reduce aspects of
agency costs associated with the separation of ownership (principal
shareholder) and control (manager agent). However, existing
governance mechanisms work well in some firms but are ineffective
in others. The literature today is still lacking a comprehensive
understanding of workable governance mechanisms and solutions
across a broad spectrum of firms.
III. Blockchain Solutions for Agency Problems in Corporate
Governance
Blockchain offers unprecedented solutions for agency problems in
corporate governance. Supervisory tasks that were traditionally
performed by principals to control their agents can be delegated to
decentralized computer networks that are highly reliable, secure,
immutable, and independent of fallible human input and discretionary
human goodwill. Blockchain technology provides an alternative
governance mechanism that eliminates agency costs - the principal’s
cost of supervising agents - by creating trust in the contractual
relationship between the principal and the agent.
1. Blockchain Guarantees
Blockchain technology provides formal guarantees to participating
principals and agents that address agency problems in corporate
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
governance. Because of the blockchain guarantees, the technology
allows a qualitatively different solution for agency problems in
corporate governance, especially if compared with the existing finance
infrastructure that is riddled with agency problems (see credit rating,
executive compensation etc.).
The immutability of the blockchain and its cryptographic security
systems provide transactional guarantees and create trust between
principals and agents in the integrity of their contractual relationship.
Such guarantees ensure no participant can circumvent the rules
embedded in blockchain code. Blockchain guarantees include
contract execution between principal and agent only if and when all
contract parameters were fulfilled by both parties and verified by a
majority of miners/nodes in the system. Hence, in the blockchain
infrastructure, there is no need for the principal to institute oversight
and monitoring with the associated agency costs. Because of the
governance guarantees embedded in code, blockchain addresses the
inherent agency problems in modern finance and corporate
governance comprehensively.
Blockchain technology secures the integrity of principal agent
relationships by removing fraudulent transactions. Compared with
existing methods of verifying and validating transactions by third
party intermediaries (banking, lending, clearing etc.), blockchain’s
security measures make blockchain validation technologies more
transparent, faster, and less prone to error and corruption. While
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
blockchain’s use of digital signatures helps establish the identity and
authenticity of the parties involved in the transaction, it is the
completely decentralized network connectivity via the Internet that
allows the most protection against fraud. Network connectivity allows
multiple copies of the blockchain to be available to all participants
across the distributed network. The decentralized fully distributed
nature of the blockchain makes it practically near impossible to
reverse, alter, or erase information in the blockchain. Blockchains’
distributed consensus model, e.g. the network “nodes” verify and
validate chain transactions before transaction execution, makes it
extremely rare for a fraudulent transaction to be recorded in the
blockchain. Blockchain’s distributed consensus model allows node
verification of transactions without comprising the privacy of the
parties. Blockchain transactions are therefore arguably safer than a
traditional transaction model that requires third-party intermediary
validation of transactions. Blockchain technology is also substantively
faster than traditional third-party intermediary validation of
transactions.
Cryptographic hashes used in blockchain technology further increase
blockchain security and removes trust barriers in agency relationships
that require monitoring of agents and create agency costs.
Cryptographic hashes are complex algorithms that use details of the
existing entirety of transactions of the existing blockchain before the
next block is added to generate a unique hash value. That hash value
ensures the authenticity of each transaction before it is added to the
block. The smallest change to the blockchain, even a single
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
digit/value, results in a different hash value. A different hash value in
turn makes any form of manipulation immediately detectable. As
such, hash cryptology provides another level of guarantee in a agency
relationship executed through blockchain technology.
Smart contracts enabled by blockchain technology allow for the
comprehensive, near error free, and zero transaction/agency cost
coordination of agency relationships. Smart contracts and smart
property are blockchain enabled computer protocols that facilitate,
verify, monitor, and enforce the negotiation and performance of a
contract between principal and agent. Agency relationships in smart
contracts run exactly as coded without any possibility of opportunistic
behavior of the agent. All contractual terms are public and fully
transparent. Accordingly, a company’s finances, for instance, are
visible on the blockchain to anyone, not just to the company’s
accounting department. Smart agency contracts run on a custom built
blockchain, that enables principals and agents to store registries of
debts or promises, create entire markets, among many other aspects
that have not yet been considered.
Agency related governance in the blockchain takes place without
intermediaries, counterparty risk, and principal’s control mechanisms.
Blockchain technology simply does not require the layers of control
and verification that prior financial systems necessitated. Control
mechanisms such as regular management (agent) meetings with
shareholders (e.g. at the AGM etc.), financial disclosures,
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
management agent scrutiny through analyst reports and financial
press, pressure on management from stock market performance, hedge
fund investors, and other institutional and private investors, are no
longer part of the blockchain enabled agency relationship in corporate
governance.
Blockchain technology facilitates a substantial increase in the
efficiency of agency relationships in orders of magnitude and lowers
agency costs equally substantial in orders of magnitude. The removal
of checks and balances in corporate governance, monitoring of agents,
audit requirements, disclosure regimes, market pressure, executive
agent compensation schemes, among many others, provides a
qualitative shift in efficiency in the agency relationship and in
corporate governance overall.
Self-validating blockchain transactions can help resolve the agency
issues between most of the stakeholders and constituents of modern
corporations. In addition to addressing the traditional agency problem
in corporate governance between shareholder principals and manager
agents, blockchain enabled smart contracting allows for the public and
fully transparent, secure, and completely networked exchange
between the corporation and customers, owners and investors, other
stakeholders, staff, regulators, strategic partners, suppliers and service
providers.
2. Removal of Agents
Blockchain technology can facilitate the removal of agents as
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
intermediaries in corporate governance through code, peer-to-peer
connectivity, crowds, and collaboration. While it is still difficult to
imagine a world without governance structures facilitated by agency
constructs, Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) have
started to challenge the core believe that governance necessitates
agency.
The first DAO, launched in May 2016, in the founders’ attempt to set
up a corporate-type organization without using a conventional
corporate structure, had a governance structure that was entirely built
on software, code, and smart contracts that ran on the public
decentralized blockchain platform Ethereum. Because if was pure
computer code it had no physical address, no jurisdiction that could
claim jurisdiction/control over it, and it was not an organization with
a traditional hierarchy as we know it from traditional corporate
structures. The DAO did not use a traditional corporate structure that
necessitated formal authority and empowerment flowing top down
from investors/shareholders through a board of directors to
management and eventually staff. Indeed, it had no directors,
managers or employees. In essence, all the core control mechanisms
typically employed by principals in agency relationships were entirely
removed in the DAO.
While the first DAO was subject to many limitations and ended in
quite some controversy, future DAOs may be less prone to problems.
Fundamental flaws in the DAO code enabled hackers to transfer one
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
third of the total funds to a subsidiary account. This hack in
combination with additional technological limitations brought down
the first DAO initiative. Yet, future DAOs are already created and
DAO enthusiasts never stopped testing it. A new DAO is currently
being developed that is not set up as a Venture Capital Fund but rather
as a donation DAO where participants donate and don’t expect returns.
DAO enthusiasts and the DAO community in general are constantly
improving the DAO and it seems possible that future DAOs may
improve agency problems in corporate governance much more
thoroughly than is currently fathomable.
3. Reforming Governance Hierarchies
DAO token holders are free from existing corporate hierarchies and
their restricting effects. People who work for a DAO are subject to a
different kind of agency relationship and not subject to a supervisor or
CEO. Instead, DAO workers work in a dynamic set of working
relationships that continuously and dynamically self-organize around
projects and outcomes, not corporate hierarchies with implicit
hierarchical biases and associated suboptimal outcomes.
The core common denominator for all DAO token members is the
unifying desire to optimize the DAO structure and the DAO token
value. If a member-identified optimization has the potential to make
the DAO more meaningful, useful, or valuable to the token holder
members, the DAO token holders will desire to perform such
optimization tasks as it is in their very interest to do so to help increase
the value of the DAO tokens. Accordingly, token holders are
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
determined to increase the value of tokens rather than lower the value.
To increase the value of its tokens, members can make DAO
optimization proposals, e.g. optimize the voting procedure, webpage
etc., that explain what actions ought to be taken to optimize and what
value such actions will add to the respective DAO token holder
community. The token holder community then votes on a given
optimization proposal. If a proposal passes, the proposing DAO
member will receive an award in the form of new tokens. Any such
payment is added to the respective DAO blockchain but now requires
for the proposing token holder to perform on the proposed parameters
of optimization. In other words, once the optimization proponent has
made a deal with the DAO, it’s in the blockchain and the proponent is
required to deliver on the proposal or her contract is cancelled.
Performance assessment in the DAO structure is based on value
optimization not on hierarchical or political processes. DAO workers’
performance are assessed in an anonymized proposal voting scheme
which is the only basis for assessment and payment. If DAO members
perform well, they will get remunerated regardless of politics,
background, or education. The only thing that counts for purposes of
assessment of DAO works is their performance of optimization
parameters. This is an important difference between classical
corporate hierarchies and DAO member performance of optimization
proposals, e.g. the DAO’s non-discriminatory performance measures.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Non-performance penalties in the DAO structure are free from biases.
If DAO community members do not deliver on a proposal that was
voted in by the DAO token holder community they lose credibility in
the DAO token holder community and may be perceived as lacking an
ability to add value. In fact, non-performance on proposal comes with
significant reputational penalties. Non-performers in the DAO
structure will be less likely to have future opportunities to earn tokens
because the other token holders are unlikely to approve non-performer
proposals. Crucially, non-performance reputational penalties are
entirely free from racial or cultural biases and associated implications
as the token holders are unlikely to even know each other. Rather, they
all work towards a common goal of optimizing the DAO and the token
value.
The DAO token holders’ focus on adding value benefits all
constituents. Because projects that cannot add value take token
holders’ time away from more productive endeavors, token holders
become focused on managing their time and efforts. Unlike in
traditional hierarchical organization where face-time and
unproductive meetings are the norm, the self-governing DAO token
optimizer avoids any such corporate hierarchy inefficiencies and frees
herself from top-down inefficiencies and bad outcomes. In essence,
the DAO work proposal and value optimization structure allows the
avoidance of bad projects, bad colleagues, and unproductive meetings.
The only thing that counts is the value proposition. In other words, the
focus shifts from political positioning and supervisor pleasing without
performance to a focus on adding active value to a given project. If
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
value can be added, the tasks will be performed, if the assessment of
the proposal suggests that the value proposition is in doubt token
holders will try to spend their time and skills on more productive and
value-adding tasks. Importantly, because the DAO structure functions
without supervisors, DAO token holders who decide they cannot add
value on a given task can move to more productive endeavors that
better utilize their skills without any penalties that would exist in the
traditional hierarchical corporate structure.
Politics in the DAO structure have a different nature compared with
traditional hierarchical corporate structures. In a traditional corporate
hierarchy, position in the hierarchy and associated authority determine
effort. In other word, the supervisor in the hierarchical structure can
determine where, what, and when workers have to perform, resulting
in suboptimal outcomes, attendance of unproductive and useless
meetings, among many other negative effects. By contrast, in the
decentralized DAO environment, influence is determined by the value
a given token holder contributed to a project’s success.
4. Agency Reform
The “value to effort focus of work flows” in the DAO structure has
the potential to reform agency relationships. The value-focused
performance in the DAO structure helps optimize work flows and
creates sustainable solutions for DAO token holders. The supervisor
in the traditional hierarchical corporate structure can determine where,
what, and when workers have to perform, which often results in
attendance of unproductive meetings, facetime, support for
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
suboptimal outcomes to please supervisors, among many other
suboptimal outcomes. By contrast, in the decentralized environment
of DAOs, influence and outcomes are not created by hierarchy but
rather determined by the value a token holder’s contributions to a
project’s success. Moreover, if a token holder adds substantial value
to the DAO, other DAO token holders will want to add their skills in
the same context which focuses the token holders’ efforts on the
highest possible value proposition.
The traditional regulatory infrastructure that attempts to overcome the
corporate governance problems associated with the separation of
ownership (shareholders) and control (management) relies heavily on
fiduciary duties. In the DAO structure such duties are less needed.
Because of the value to effort focus of work flows in the DAO
structure, supervision of management and imposition of legal duties
on management is less needed because there are fewer or no
supervisors. Rather, token holders optimize the DAO together
according to their best value propositions in accordance with their
unique skillsets, backgrounds, and training.
IV. Open issues
The discussion above has outlined the potential of blockchain
technology as an emerging technology for governance design. Many
of the ideal-typical and theoretical evaluations therein are subject to
real-world limitations.
First and foremost, blockchain technology is a foundational
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
technology whose transformational impact takes decades rather than
years to take hold and reform legacy systems. Most complex systems
and structures that will be reformed by the technology are
interdependent. Reform and development of one area alone cannot be
successful as the existence of multiple additional support structures
are needed. Even if the infrastructure elements are being developed in
any of the major areas of use cases for blockchain technology,
complex discussions around structural changes in legacy systems are
needed before the technology can be applied.
In the corporate governance context, the application of blockchain
technology may evolve within existing centralized structures or in a
decentralized environment. The former requires the authorities to
come to a consensus on how and when to implement such technology
for the governance use case. For the latter, core issues that have
afflicted centralized governance solutions, such as information
asymmetries between principal and agent, censorship, opportunism of
agents, breaches of fiduciary duties, liability rules for principals and
agents, and fraud or third-party interference, can only be truly
removed to fully reform the agency relationship if and when a truly
decentralized public blockchain emerges that is scalable and fully
secure.
As agency relationships become more complex, a backstop for human
behavior in agency relationships becomes necessary. The notion that
agency relationships in smart contracts run exactly as coded without
any possibility of opportunistic behavior of the agent is less likely to
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

2019 BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
uphold in complex agency relationships. Similarly, without a
decentralized human backstop to code, the immutability of the
blockchain and its cryptographic security systems may not be able to
create truly transactional guarantees and trust between principals and
agents in the integrity of their contractual relationship.
Blockchain-based corporate governance solutions in DAOs require
evolutionary blockchain governance protocols. Socially optimal hard-
forking rules cannot suffice. Blockchain-based guarantees embedded
in blockchain code can help ensure that no participant in business
transactions and agency relationships can circumvent the set of
governance rules. Blockchain guarantees include contract execution
between principal and agent only if and when all contract parameters
were fulfilled by both parties and verified in a consensus algorithm.
Hence, in the blockchain infrastructure, a lower level of oversight and
monitoring of agents changes the cost structure of the principal agent
relationship. Yet, the basis of such coded guarantees will evolve and
require protocol upgrades for that changing environment. Without
evolutionary governance upgrades the cost reduction for the agency
relationship cannot be maintained.
V. Conclusion
Agency problems in corporate governance can be reformed by way of
blockchain technology. As a foundational technology, blockchain-
based governance solutions for agency problems in corporate
governance depend on the creation of infrastructure components that
have not yet been conceptualized in the decentralized technology
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

BLOCKCHAIN SOLUTIONS FOR CORPORATE GOVERNANCE - VERSION 8.DOCX
evolution. Once supported by the necessary infrastructure
components, decentralized networked governance can, over time,
create the environment that enables the removal of internal and
external monitoring mechanisms previously necessitated by agency
problems in corporate governance.
Yet, the boundaries of technological implementation may necessitate
a long-term commitment by all constituents in the governance reform
process. Centralized and decentralized blockchain based governance
solutions require different implementation efforts.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393

