DAOS – INTERNAL GOVERNANCE & EXTERNAL LEGAL DESIGN
DECENTRALIZED AUTONOMOUS ORGANIZATIONS
–
INTERNAL GOVERNANCE AND EXTERNAL LEGAL
DESIGN
Wulf A. Kaal**
Abstract
Most of the applications and uses of digital assets are improved and
expanded with well-functioning and well-governed DAOs. The
article evaluates the technical and internal governance solutions
promulgated by DAO projects. Particular emphasis is placed on the
duality of feedback effects between internal DOA governance and
external DAO legal designs.
Key Words: Decentralized Autonomous Organization,
Governance, Legal Design, Digital Assets, Decentralized Finance,
Blockchain, Start-up, Decentralized Commerce, Emerging
Technology, Token Models, Incentive Design, Tokens, Distributed
Ledger Technology, Decentralized Infrastructure, Reputation
Staking
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
** Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis,
USA). The author is on the board of directors of the Emerging Technology
Association in Zug, Switzerland. The author is also a founding member of the
DevDAO. The author is gratefull for ongoing discussions about DAO solutions
with Craig Calcaterra. The author is also grateful for outstanding research
assistance from Hayley Howe and research librarian assistance from Nicole Kinn.
The author did not receive any form of financial incentive for authoring this
article.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 3
II. DECENTRALIZED AUTONOMOUS ORGANIZATIONS ................................ 5
1. History of DAOs ............................................................................... 6
2. Extending Business Opportunities ................................................. 12
3. Addressing Age-Old Problems ....................................................... 13
4. Value to Efforts Workflow .............................................................. 15
5. Maintaining the Fluidity of Decentralized Order .......................... 19
III. DAO LIMITATIONS ......................................................................... 21
1. Path Dependencies ......................................................................... 22
2. Regulatory Uncertainty .................................................................. 23
3. Suboptimal Incentive Design ......................................................... 28
IV. GOVERNANCE & LEGAL DESIGN EXPERIMENTATION ..................... 30
1. Governance .................................................................................... 32
a) Dynamic Elements ................................................................................ 35
b) On-Chain Governance .......................................................................... 36
2. Legal Designs ................................................................................ 39
a) OpenLaw - LAO ................................................................................... 40
b) DAA ...................................................................................................... 44
c) HOPR .................................................................................................... 46
d) MolochDAO ......................................................................................... 47
e) MakerDAO ........................................................................................... 51
f) DevDAO ............................................................................................... 55
V. CONCLUSION ....................................................................................... 65
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

I. Introduction
Blockchain-based businesses are a natural global extension of
platform businesses. Blockchain-based smart contracts can
standardize business processes and enable autonomous
organizations. Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs)
instantiate the need for truly global borderless entities that
coordinate agency relationships and limit liabilities via smart
contracts. Given the global nature of commerce through internet-
based platform businesses and borderless payment systems, among
many others, the global promise of the concept of a DAO as a
business vehicle is only truly fulfilled if DAOs can be set up via the
internet and are jurisdictionally recognized.
DAOs have the potential to upgrade business and society on
multiple levels. The business applications of DAOs are near
limitless. For example, most of the applications and uses of digital
currencies are improved and expanded with well-functioning and
well-governed DAOs. DAOs help upgrade digital assets across the
spectrum of applications and uses. This includes digital assets that
can be used as mediums of exchange, speculation,1 payment rail for
non-expensive cross-borders money transfer, and non-monetary
uses such as time stamping.2 Additional use cases of DAOs include
financial transactions, secure voting, autonomous organizations,
company management, freedom of speech networks, online games,
crowdfunding, and speculation, among many other possible
1 A. ROGOJANU AND L. BADEA, The Issue of Competing Currencies: Case Study
– Bitcoin, 21 THEOR. APPL. ECON. 103-114 (2014); Paola Ceruleo, Bitcoin: A
Rival to Fiat Foney or a Speculative Financial Asset? (Apr. 13, 2015) (Master's
Degree Thesis) (on file with LUISS Guido Carli Library)
2 Robleh Ali et al., The Economics of Digital Currencies, BANK OF ENGLAND: Q.
BULL., 2014, at 276.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
applications that cannot be foreseen at the time of publication of this
article.3
DAOs are organizations that run through rules encoded in smart
contracts.4 DAO smart contracts are executed when the conditions
embedded in them are recognized as math by the network.5 DAOs
can be built on any smart contracting platform. In the 2020s, was
still the leading smart contracting platform for DAO creation.
Ethereum’s programming language, Solidity, enables the
development of smart contracts6 in conjunction with Ethereum’s
Virtual Machine (EVM), upon which every Ethereum node runs to
maintain consensus. EVM is Turing-complete, meaning that it can
perform calculations that any other programmable computer is
capable of, enabling execution of code exactly as intended.7 This is
the unique feature of the Ethereum network that enables smart
contracts and a high level of flexibility in digital innovation, which
makes the platform attractive to developers. Other networks are
developing upgrades to blockchains that enhance smart contracting
and associated DAO features.
A core problem in the evolution of DAOs is the applicable legal
framework. The concept of a DAO fails if it becomes centralized.
Tying the legal existence of a DAO to any forms of existing legal
and jurisdictional frameworks typically results in the need for a
representative in the chosen legal framework and jurisdiction,
which, in turn, centralizes the DAO and results in the failure of the
DAO concept. From the perspective of regulatory competition, one
jurisdiction may one day offer a DAO legal framework that removes
the need for a representative in that jurisdiction. However, even if
this should exist one day, a significant risk remains that such DAO
entity could be labeled a partnership with joint and several liability
3 Zvezdin Besarabov and Todor Kolev, Predicting Digital Asset Market Based
on Blockchain Activity Data (Oct. 15, 2018), https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.06696;
4 CoinMarketCap, Crypto Glossary, COINMARKETCAP,
https://coinmarketcap.com/glossary/ (last accessed Jun. 22, 2020).
5 Lanouar Charfeddine et al., Investigating the Dynamic Relationship Between
Cryptocurrencies and Conventional Assets: Implications for Financial Investors,
85 ECON. MODELLING 198, 201 (2020).
6 Crypto Glossary, supra, note 4.
7 Crypto Glossary, supra, note 4.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

for its members in a given jurisdiction. Only a jurisdiction that gives
the DAO limited liability as an entity and accepts its independent
status without the need for representation may truly be favorable for
DAO concepts. Such jurisdiction would have to accept that the
DAO is a virtual organization based on code that is accessible from
any computer with an internet connection and cannot be
jurisdictionally captured. The implication is that such DAO on each
computer in any country is effective if another computer in a given
country connects with and interacts with the code.
DAO structures are evolving lockstep with applicable legal
solutions. On the operational side, overcoming bugs that lead to
security flaws is a crucial part of the DAO technology evolution. On
the legal side, experimentation with different legal arrangements in
disparate jurisdictions helps DAO communities innovate for the
creation of consumer facing applications in different settings around
the globe.
This article examines the existing attempts to establish DAO
concepts and legal frameworks. The author evaluates the technical
solutions and internal governance solutions promulgated by DAO
projects. Particular emphasis is placed on the duality and feedback
effects between internal DAO governance and external legal design.
The article concludes with an examination of legal DAO
frameworks and their existing limitations and potential for future
development.
II. Decentralized Autonomous Organizations
DAOs are becoming increasingly popular.8 Several global trends
can help increase the popularity of DAOs: globalization of talent
and transformation of the nature of work (including the units work
is measured in); coordination for well-resourced stakeholder
networks; emergence of decentralized finance; normalization of
8 See, e.g. Nathaniel Whittemore, Narrative Watch: Why 2020 Will Be the Year
of the DAO, COINDESK (Jan. 9, 2020), https://www.coindesk.com/narrative-
watch-will-daos-break-out-in-2020.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
participation in governance; deplatforming; and an upswing in
political/social organization.9
Three generations of DAOs can be observed during the
evolution of the concept of DAOs.10 The first generation of DAOs
did not have any legal attachments or legal designs associated with
it. That includes the original 2015 DAO. The second generation
started to consider a legal wrapper on the DAO concept in order to
enable it to engage more with the real world. The third generation
of DAOs considered an actual association or organization that
already has a legal construct with completed administrative
paperwork. The DAO itself was then added to the existing legal
construct. Most of the experimentation with DAO internal
governance and external legal design is happening in that third
generation of DAOs, which is the subject matter of this article.
1. History of DAOs
The concept of a DAO was mentioned in the literature as early as
2005.11 More concrete technological attempts to build DAOs
9 Stefano Bernardi, Why 2019 Will Be The Year Of The DAO,
STEFANOBERNARDI.COM (Jan. 17, 2019), https://stefanobernardi.com/why-
2019-will-be-the-year-of-the-dao/.
10 MME Switzerland Token Summit, infra note 57, at 0:00-2:20.
11 The LAO, Unpacking The LAO, MEDIUM (Sep. 23, 2019),
https://medium.com/openlawofficial/unpacking-the-lao-e463f7357b4b (quoting
Charles Stroll, Accelerando (2005) https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accelerando).
“The divested Microsoft divisions have automated their legal processes and are
spawning subsidiaries, IPOing them, and exchanging title in a bizarre parody
of bacterial plasmid exchange, so fast that, by the time the windfall tax demands
are served, the targets don’t exist anymore, even though the same staff are
working on the same software in the same Mumbai cubicle farms. Welcome to
the twenty-first century . . . . Today’s increasingly automated corporations don’t
understand mortality.” – Charles Stroll. Matt Ridley, The Rational Optimist:
How Prosperity Evolves, page 355, “I forecast that the twenty-first century will
show a continuing expansion of catallaxy - Hayek’s word for spontaneous order
created by exchange and specialisation. Intelligence will become more and
more collective;
innovation and order will become more and more bottom-up; work will become
more and more specialised, leisure more and more diversified. Large
corporations, political parties and government bureaucracies will crumble and
fragment as central planning agencies did before them. The Bankerdammerung
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

appeared in the early 2010s. For example, in 2013, Daniel Larimer,
CTO of EOS, published an article to introduce a “new metaphor for
explaining” cryptocurrencies—the first proposal of the concept that
has become a DAO.12 Larimer asked readers to think of a
cryptocurrency as shares in a Decentralized Autonomous
Corporation (“DAC”) where the source code defines the bylaws,
with a goal to earn a profit for shareholders by performing valuable
services for the free market.13 The DAC pays for the services it
requires to operate—transaction validation, security against double-
spend attacks, viral marketing campaign, customer privacy, traffic
filtering defense—with shares in the decentralized company.14
Vitalik Buterin followed up this literature with three blog posts on
the DAC concept.15
of 2008 swept away a few leviathans but fragmented and short lived hedge
funds and boutiques will spring up in their place. The collapse of Detroit’s big
car makers in 2009 leaves a flock of entrepreneurial startups in charge of the
next generation of cars and engines. Monolithic behemoths, whether private or
nationalised, are vulnerable as never before to this Lilliputian Assault. They are
steadily being driven extinct not just by small firms, but by ephemeral
aggregations of people that form and reform continuously. The big firms that
survive will do so by turning themselves into bottom-up evolvers. Google,
dependent on millions of instantaneous auctions to raise revenue from its Ad
Words, is ‘an economy unto itself, a seething laboratory’, says Stephen Levy.
But Google will seem monolithic compared with what comes next.”; see also
VALVE CORPORATION, New Handbook for New Employees (2012),
https://steamcdn-
a.akamaihd.net/apps/valve/Valve_NewEmployeeHandbook.pdf
12 Daniel Larimer, The Hidden Costs of Bitcoin, LTB NETWORK (Sep. 7, 2013),
https://letstalkbitcoin.com/is-bitcoin-overpaying-for-false-security. See also Stan
Larimer, Bitcoin and the Three Laws of Robotics, LTB NETWORK (Sep. 14,
2013), https://letstalkbitcoin.com/bitcoin-and-the-three-laws-of-robotics.
13 Larimer, supra note 12.
14 Larimer, supra note 12.
15 See Vitalik Buterin, Bootstrapping A Decentralized Autonomous Corporation:
Part I, BITCOIN MAGAZINE (Sep. 20, 2013),
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/bootstrapping-a-decentralized-
autonomous-corporation-part-i-1379644274; Vitalik Buterin, Bootstrapping A
Decentralized Autonomous Corporation: Part II, BITCOIN MAGAZINE (Sep. 22,
2013), https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/bootstrapping-an-autonomous-
decentralized-corporation-part-2-interacting-with-the-world-1379808279;
Vitalik Buterin, Bootstrapping A Decentralized Autonomous Corporation, Part
III, BITCOIN MAGAZINE (Sep. 25, 2013),
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/bootstrapping-a-decentralized-
autonomous-corporation-part-3-identity-corp-1380073003.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
In 2014, Ethereum16 was launched, creating two smart-contract
addresses—1) issuer functionality 2) membership-shareholder
address side17—which was revolutionary because it allowed token
issuers to connect with members (shareholders).18 Every single
aspect listed on the original 2014 version of the Ethereum website
actually happened and was used in production today.19 For example,
Ethereum created a simple token that was not ERC 20 at the time.20
The Ethereum website also listed “a decentralized company or
organization that operates entirely on the blockchain”.21 In
November 2015, the Ethereum website described a democratic
autonomous organization—“a robot running your organization is
guaranteed to execute only what it was programmed to.”22
Ethereum was originally launched as a foundation23 in order to
launch and have sufficient funds to further promote24 and propose
the genesis block to the community.25 Yet, the system is
cybernetic26 because after it launched, the community had to decide
which version of the protocol they would adopt and use.27 The
cybernetic system has a new kind of counterparty that does not
currently exist.28
In August 2015, Dash, a fork of Bitcoin, added a DAO (pooling)
element to its protocol—ten percent of the block rewards went into
a pool to fund proposals to grow the Dash network/ecosystem.29
16 See Vitalik Buterin, Ethereum Whitepaper, ETHEREUM,
https://ethereum.org/whitepaper/ (originally published 2013).
17 MME SWITZERLAND TOKEN SUMMIT, Beyond DAOs and Foundations: The
Decentralized Autonomous Association (DAA Model), 16:57-17:30, YOUTUBE
(May 28, 2020), https://youtu.be/tGLiSg5OLzE.
18 Id. at 16:57-17:30.
19 Id. at 21:00-21:45.
20 Id. at 22:00-22:30.
21 Id. at 21:45-21:57 (citing Ethereum.org, Jan. 2014).
22 Id. at 22:33-23:00 (citing Ethereum.org, Nov. 2015).
23 Id. at 37:51-37:51.
24 Id. at 40:21-40:34.
25 Id. at 37:51-40:21.
26 Id. at 40:38-41:33
27 Id. at 40:12-40:21
28 Id. at 42:40-43:00
29 Vu Gaba Vineb, The State of The DAOs, HACKERNOON (Apr. 17, 2019),
https://hackernoon.com/the-state-of-the-daos-b7cba318460b.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

Hundreds of proposals passed in this DAO, ranging from funding
development efforts to marketing and community awareness
efforts.30
In May 2016, the first DAO, “The DAO,” was launched on
Ethereum, and became “The Mother of all DAOs” and the biggest
crowdfunding happening of all time.31 Despite several earlier
attempts to technically implement a DAO, the first DAO launched
in 2015 and was set up as an organization based purely on code and
smart contracts. It did not have a conventional corporate structure,
no incorporation, and had no physical address or headquarter. The
DAO aimed to operate as a venture capital fund for the crypto and
decentralized space.32 Its code was open source developed by
Slock.It33 with a governance structure that was entirely on-chain,
essentially removing all core control mechanisms typically
employed by principals in agency relationships.34
The DAO unexpectedly became the biggest crowdfund ever and
gathered 12.7M Ether (worth $150M at the time).35 The DAO was
never expected to have a lot of money, but ended up collecting more
than $100 million and became the biggest crowdfunding campaign
of all time.36 During the DAO crowdfunding campaign in May 2016,
30 Gaba Vineb, supra note 29; see also Dash Central, Budget,
https://www.dashcentral.org/budget.
31 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 22:52-23:30 (citing
daohub.org, May 2016).
32 See, e.g. Nathaniel Popper, A Venture Fund With Plenty of Virtual Capital, but
No Capitalist, N.Y. TIMES (May 21, 2016),
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/22/business/dealbook/crypto-ether-bitcoin-
currency.html.
33 The LAO, The LAO: A For-Profit, Limited Liability Autonomous
Organization, MEDIUM (Sep. 3, 2019), https://medium.com/openlawofficial/the-
lao-a-for-profit-limited-liability-autonomous-organization-9eae89c9669c.
34 Wulf A. Kaal, Blockchain-Based Corporate Governance (August 23, 2019).
MAX PLANCK INSTITUTE LUXEMBOURG FOR PROCEDURAL LAW
(December 2019) , Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904
35 The LAO, The LAO Joins Forces with Moloch DAO and MetaCartel to Begin
to Standardize DAO-Related Smart Contracts, MEDIUM (Dec. 13, 2019),
https://medium.com/@thelaoofficial/the-lao-joins-forces-with-moloch-dao-and-
metacartel-to-begin-to-standardize-dao-related-smart-b6ee4b0db071.
36 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 22:52-23:30 (citing
daohub.org, May 2016).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
all investors could become DAO participants by purchasing DAO
Tokens. The DAO raised more than $168 million from
approximately 10,000 “investors”.
The DAO was the founders’ attempt to set up a corporate-type
organization without using a conventional corporate structure. The
founders’ central idea was that the wisdom of the crowd would lead
to smarter and more game-changing investment decisions. DAO
Tokens were designed to be fully transferable and tradeable on
“peer-to-peer” exchanges, similar to shares in a traditional listed
corporation. The automated structure was intended to give
“participants” in the DAO direct real-time control over contributed
funds. Not in small part due to this great success, The DAO was
expected to be at the center of many economies going forward.37
Alas, things went terribly wrong with the DAO. Fundamental flaws
in the DAO code enabled hackers to transfer one-third of the total
funds to a subsidiary account, which brought down the first DAO
initiative.38 Subsequently, The DAO tokens were found to be
securities and therefore subject to federal securities regulations.39
The silver lining of the story of The DAO is that it taught developers
that “code is not law”—The DAO had a few technical
shortcomings, but it effectively demonstrated that it is possible to
use decentralized organizations living on a blockchain to manage
funds contributed by a large number of people.40 The DAO
communities have proliferated in the aftermath of the original DAO
hack and continue to innovate to create innovative consumer facing
applications in different settings around the globe.41
37 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 23:25-23:39
38 Kaal, supra note 34, at 18-19.
39 See, Press Release, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, SEC Issues
Investigative Report Concluding DAO Tokens, a Digital Asset, Were
Securities, (Jul. 25, 2017); see also, U.S. SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
COMMISSION, Report of Investigation Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO (Jul. 25, 2017),
https://www.sec.gov/litigation/investreport/34-81207.pdf.
40 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 23:39-24:45.
41 Dino Mark, Vlad Zamfir, Emin Gün Sirer, A Call for a Temporary Moratorium
on “The DAO” (May 26, 2016) (Draft),
https://docs.google.com/document/d/10kTyCmGPhvZy94F7VWyS-
dQ4lsBacR2dUgGTtV98C40/edit#.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

In November 2016 Aragon, a DAO project focused on decentralized
coordination and governance, was introduced.42 The network
provides infrastructure and services to platform users43 who can
create and manage organizations that exist as a set of smart contracts
defining the organization’s stakeholders and their associated rights
and privileges.44 In November 2018, a DAO that serves as an online
court (the Aragon Network) was launched, acting as a decentralized
oracle protocol that resolves subjective disputes with binary
outcomes.45 Governance authority over dispute resolution is granted
to token holders by way of an Aragon association, which handles
operational decisions.46 Aragon describes DAOs as an
unincorporated entity in nature, but can manage funds and
participate in the market in the way incorporated entities can.47 As
such, Aragon believes in DAOs as DAOs without a legal setup.48
In December 2017, MakerDAO was launched, created as a DAO to
administer the running of its stablecoin Dai.49 The Maker system
creates a decentralized, open scientific risk management
community, which was initially50 guided by the Maker Foundation,
but eventually will be led by risk teams formally elected by MKR
42 Steven McKie, The Year of the DAO Comeback, MEDIUM (Mar. 23, 2019),
https://medium.com/amentum/the-year-of-the-dao-comeback-9c888b44980; see
also Luis Cuende, The Aragon Manifesto, ARAGON (May 8, 2018),
https://aragon.org/blog/the-aragon-manifesto-4a21212eac03.
43 Aragon Network / Whitepaper, GITHUB, https://github.com/aragon/whitepaper.
44 Id.
45 Id.
46 Id.
47 Luis Cuende, DAOs, the Next Big Thing After Social Media, ARAGON (Jun. 11,
2020), https://aragon.org/blog/daos-the-next-big-thing.
48 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 37:05-37:50
49 Gaba Vineb, supra note 29; see also MAKERDAO, The Maker Protocol: Maker
DAO’s Multi-Collateral Dai (MCD) System,
https://makerdao.com/whitepaper/White%20Paper%20-
The%20Maker%20Protocol_%20MakerDAO%E2%80%99s%20Multi-
Collateral%20Dai%20(MCD)%20System-FINAL-%20021720.pdf [hereinafter
Maker Whitepaper]
50 See MAKERDAO, Governance Risk Framework (Part 1), MAKERDAO: BLOG
(July 31, 2018), https://blog.makerdao.com/makerdao-governance-risk-
framework/ (discussion of the The First Risk Construct).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
vote, and contributions of independent volunteer risk researchers.51
The Maker Protocol allows users to generate Dai by leveraging
collateral assets approved by “Maker Governance,” the community-
organized and operated process of managing the protocol.52
In February 2019 MolochDAO launched, designed to tackle
collective action problems. Its design choices have been narrowly
focused to coordinate charity grants for Ethereum projects.53 The
MolochDAO led to a set of “organizational primitives”— “simple
smart contracts that enabled groups of people to pool assets,
collectively vote, and direct assets to third parties.”54 MolochDAO
is entirely on-chain without a legal wrapper.55
2. Extending Business Opportunities
The evolving decentralization of business and society is an
extension of the existing societal organization and human
achievement. As organizational centralization reaches natural
limitations, decentralized organizational elements become more
prevalent. For example, internet-based platform businesses try to
make organizational hierarchies flatter to increase creativity and
output and instill a culture of “best idea wins.” Similarly, as
business reaches natural frontiers, it extends its reach via
decentralized structures. Companies like eBay and Amazon provide
examples of centralized companies that decentralized the customer
experience. These companies use the structure, control, and
associated profit optimization of centralized entities and combine it
with the bottom-up approach of decentralization in the form of
customer reviews. The farthest extension of these ideals is
instantiated in the DAO, as an organization that only exists in code.
At the beginning of the twenty first century, DAOs epitomize
organizational decentralization.
51 Id.; see also MAKERDAO, Governance Risk Framework (Part 2),
MAKERDAO: BLOG (July 30, 2018), https://blog.makerdao.com/makerdao-
governance-risk-framework-part-2/, at “Maker token holder (MTH) and Maker
internal risk team (MRT) duties”.
52 Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49.
53 The LAO, supra, note 33.
54 The LAO, supra note 35.
55 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 33:53-34:15.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAOs can use elements of profit generation and redistribution in a
way that in effect combines capitalistic and socialistic ideas. DAOs
allow for the organization of society in economic structures that
generate profit while at the same time redistributing resources.
DAOs combine elements of socialistic cooperatives with the
meritocracy and incentivization of capitalism. For example, DAOs
may provide individual members the ability to sell their personal
(e.g. social media etc. consumption) data, preferences, opinions etc.
in decentralized systems, including in real time. Such assets, e.g.
one’s data, preferences, opinions etc. can only limitedly be
commercialized in existing centralized structures. In decentralized
structures such assets can be tokenized, valued, and mobilized.
Similarly, tokenized hard assets, such as real estate, can be
tokenized and sold in unprecedented fractional forms. The ability to
control one’s data and fractionalized (hard) assets enables new
forms of consumption for consumers. In the early 2020, several
startups were developing a barter system in which services, such as
free car rides etc., become available in return for disclosure of
consumers’ data and personal preferences etc.
3. Addressing Age-Old Problems
DAOs provide algorithmic remedies for the age-old principal-agent
problem.56 Most business organizations, particularly corporations,
are to some extent characterized by the separation of ownership and
control, leading to many opportunities for agency conflicts.57 An
agency relationship results from a contract between a principal and
agent whereby the agent acts on the principal’s behalf, pursuant to
the decision-making authority the principal delegated to the agent.58
56 Philip Boucher, How Blockchain Technology Could Change Our Lives, Eur.
Parliamentary Res. Serv. Sci. Foresight Unit, Feb. 2017, at 20
57 See Wulf A. Kaal, Blockchain Solutions for Agency Problems in Corporate
Governance, ECONOMIC INFORMATION TO FACILITATE DECISION MAKING (2019)
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3373393 at 3 (citing Michael C. Jensen & William H.
Meckling, Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behaviour, Agency Costs and
Ownership Structure, 3 J. FIN. ECON. 305 (1976); Andrei Shleifer & Robert W.
Vishny, A Survey of Corporate Governance, 737 J. FIN. 737 (1997)).
58 Id. at 4.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
Information asymmetries between the principal and the agent as
well as agents’ opportunistic behavior resulting from self-interest
lead principals to lack trust in their agents.59 Because of this lack of
trust, principals attempt to control, monitor, and supervise the agent
to differing extents,60 which leads to transaction costs.61 Reducing
transaction costs is an age-old goal, as outlined by Ronald Coase in
1937.62 In 2016, the financial services industry began an effort to
automate old processes to cut costs, errors, and friction.63 The
blockchain technology of a DAO helps address the principal-agent
problem by reducing misconduct and error. Incentives are realigned
between otherwise disparate interests of principals and agents
because all participants in a DAO share the same goal, which
reduces behavior that is contrary to the interests of the organization.
This realignment of incentives shifts economic and power
dynamics. The technology and incentive designs in DAOs are
intended to remove hierarchy, eliminate errors in human judgment
and prevent intentional misconduct such as self-dealing.64 Because
algorithms control large parts of the DAO interaction, DAOs have
enhanced opportunities to reduce human error and corruption.65
Potentially automated organizational functions include admission
of new stakeholders, contracting with third parties, as well as taking
other actions that normally require human deliberation.66 The ledger
is also public, so manipulation of the ledger is an unlikely method
to defraud stakeholders.67 Once the contract terms are coded in a
blockchain, they are very difficult to change68 which creates
certainty and predictability.69 It also increases efficiency, such as
59 Id. at 5.
60 Id. at 5-7.
61 Id. at 3, 5-7.
62 Ronald Coase, The Nature of the Firm, 4 ECONOMICA 386 (1937).
63 Tanaya Macheel, The DAO Might be Groundbreaking, But Is It Legal?
AMERICAN BANKER (May 19, 2016, 3:12 PM),
https://www.americanbanker.com/news/the-dao-might-be-groundbreaking-but-
is-it-legal.
64 Shawn S. Amuial et al., The Blockchain: A Guide for Legal and Business
Professionals ch. 4, at 2 (2016).
65 Macheel, supra note 63, at 1; see also Boucher, supra note 56, at 20.
66 Amuial et al., supra note 64, at 2.
67 Amuial et al., supra note 64, at 3
68 Amuial et al., supra note 64, at 2.
69 Primavera De Filippi & Aaron Wright, BLOCKCHAIN AND THE LAW: THE RULE
OF CODE 152 (2018).
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

via the collective decision-making ability of a DAO through
technology, reducing the costs associated with acquiring sufficient
information to actively and efficiently participate in any decision-
making process.70 DAOs can reduce transaction costs and help align
interests for stakeholders in a more decentralized manner.71 The
core common denominator for all DAO token members is a desire
to optimize the DAO structure and token value,72 which benefits all
constituents.73 Even performance assessment removes human error
and corruption—instead of politics and hierarchy, assessment is
based on value optimization, in an anonymized proposal voting
scheme—employing non-discriminatory performance measures.74
In the DAO environment, influence is determined by the value of a
given token holder’s contribution to a project’s success.75 The
governing source code is public and therefore a DAO promotes
transparency, 76 allowing individuals to maintain control over their
personal data and their identities.77
4. Value to Efforts Workflow
The value to effort workflows in DAOs helps address the
shortcomings of employee work requirements in hierarchical
entities. Traditional hierarchical corporate structures often result in
suboptimal outcomes and unsustainable solutions for employees.
Work can be pushed down onto an employee who is forced, by
economic necessities, to perform a function the employee may not
appreciate. Performing tasks one does not like typically does rarely
yield appropriate job performance. The supervisor in the traditional
70 Id. at 152.
71 Shuai Wang, et. al., Blockchain-Enabled Smart Contracts: Architecture,
Applications, and Future Trends, 49 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYS., MAN, AND
CYBERNETICS: SYSTEMS 2266, 2270 (2019) (citing What is a DAO?,
https://blockchainhub.net/dao-decentralized-autonomous-organization).
72 Kaal, supra note 57, at 19.
73 Kaal, supra note 57, at 21.
74 Kaal, supra note 57, at 20.
75 Kaal, supra note 57, at 22.
76 Amuial et al., supra note 64, at 2-3.
77 Usman W. Chohan, The Decentralized Autonomous Organization and
Governance Issues Dec. 2017 at 4 (citing Chohan, U.W., Initial Coin Offerings
(ICOs: Risks, Regulation, and Accountability, 2017).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
hierarchical corporate structure can determine where, what, and
when workers have to perform, which often results in attendance of
unproductive meetings, facetime, support for suboptimal outcomes
to please supervisors, among many other suboptimal outcomes. By
contrast, in DAOs, influence and outcomes are not created by
hierarchy but rather determined by the value a token holder
contributes to a DAO. The value-focused performance in the DAO
structure helps optimize workflows and creates sustainable solutions
for DAO token holders. Moreover, if a token holder adds substantial
value to the DAO, other DAO token holders will want to add their
skills in the same context which focuses the token holders’ efforts
on the highest possible value proposition. This “value to efforts
workflows” in the DAO structure has the potential to change the way
society works and creates outcomes.
The incentive design for value to effort workflows in DAOs can take
two core forms. Economic incentives of DAO members can be the
value of the DAO token the members own. The hope that the value
of the tokens increases or does not substantially decrease as more
members are recruited and the respective DAO grows, incentivizes
cohesion, work performance, and long-term engagement. In addition
to the potential token appreciation, economic incentives for DAO
members can take the form of earning tokens by performing tasks
for the DAO. In other words, by supporting the DAO achieve its
objectives, DAO token holders can earn a separate income in
addition to token value appreciation.
Compensation in the form of token value appreciation originates
from supply and demand. In theory, token value appreciation
liberates DAO members from the shortcomings of existing corporate
compensation practices. The compensation afforded to DAO
members can take the form of increases in value of the DAO token
the members own. Because the total outstanding and publicly held
supply of tokens for any given DAO may be capped and fully
transparent and pre-determined in code, the value of the respective
DAO tokens could in theory increases with demand. Moreover,
because the total supply of tokens can be pre-determined and capped
in the DAO code, dilution by central administrators such as
government officials or self-interested or biased
executives/supervisors/CEOs is less likely, depending on the
respective DAO design and code. Moreover, the alignment of
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

interests between shareholders and management in the existing
corporate structures via stock options, among others, and their
suboptimal effects on sustainability, reporting, and work
environment, is no longer necessary.
The priorities and work schedules of DAO members are not
determined in a classical top-down corporate hierarchy. In fact, the
traditional forms of command and control, giving and receiving
orders does not exist because the functionality of a supervisor, CEO
or boss does not exist in a DAO structure. What facilitates the
cooperation of DAO token holders is the compensation of DAO
members that, in addition to the supply and demand of tokens and
token appreciation, can take the form of earning tokens by
performing tasks for the DAO. In other words, by supporting the
DAO achieve its objectives, DAO token holders can earn a separate
income in addition to token value appreciation. While token holders
in the DAO community may identify DAO requirements or needs,
such as for instance a new or optimized webpage that helps the DAO
community, such requirements are not identified in the form of a
mandate. In other words, no particular DAO member is tasked with
and mandated to perform the identified optimization.
The core common denominator for all DAO token members is the
unifying desire to optimize the DAO purpose and the associated
DAO token value. If a member-identified optimization has the
potential to make the DAO more meaningful, useful, or valuable to
the token holder members, the DAO token holders will desire to
perform such optimization tasks as it is in their very interest to do so
to help increase the value of their DAO tokens. Accordingly, in
efforts to increase the value of its tokens, members can make DAO
optimization proposals, e.g. optimize the voting procedure, webpage
etc., that explain what actions ought to be taken to optimize and what
value such actions will add to the respective DAO token holder
community. The token holder community then votes on a given
optimization proposal. If a proposal passes, the proposing DAO
member will receive an award in the form of new tokens. Any such
payment is added to the respective DAO blockchain but now
requires for the proposing token holder to perform on the proposed
parameters of optimization. In other words, once the optimization
proponent has made a deal with the DAO, it is in the blockchain and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
the proponent is required to deliver on the proposal, or her contract
is cancelled.
Performance assessment in the DAO structure is based on value
optimization not on hierarchical or political processes. DAO
workers’ performance is assessed in an anonymized proposal voting
scheme which is the only basis for assessment and payment. If DAO
members perform well, they will get remunerated regardless of
politics, background, or education. The only thing that counts for
purposes of assessment of DAO works is their performance of
optimization parameters. This is an important difference between
classical corporate hierarchies and DAO member performance of
optimization proposals, e.g. the DAO’s non-discriminatory
performance measures.
Non-performance penalties in the DAO structure are free from
biases. If DAO community members do not deliver on a proposal
that was voted in by the DAO token holder community, they lose
credibility or reputation in the DAO token holder community and
may be perceived as lacking an ability to add value. In fact, non-
performance on proposal comes with significant reputational
penalties. Non-performers in the DAO structure will be less likely to
have future opportunities to earn tokens because the other token
holders are unlikely to approve non-performer proposals. Crucially,
non-performance reputational penalties are entirely free from racial
or cultural biases and associated implications as the token holders
are unlikely to even know each other. Rather, they all work towards
a common goal of optimizing the DAO and the token value.
The DAO token holders’ focus on adding value benefits all
constituents. Because projects that cannot add value take token
holders’ time away from more productive endeavors, token holders
become focused on managing their time and efforts. Unlike in
traditional hierarchical organization where face-time and
unproductive meetings are the norm, the self-governing DAO token
optimizer avoids any such corporate hierarchy inefficiencies and
frees herself from top-down inefficiencies and bad outcomes. In
essence, the DAO work proposal and value optimization structure
allows the avoidance of bad projects, bad colleagues, and
unproductive meetings. The only thing that counts is the value
proposition. In other words, the focus shifts from political
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

positioning and supervisor pleasing without performance to a focus
on adding active value to a given project. If value can be added, the
tasks will be performed, if the assessment of the proposal suggests
that the value proposition is in doubt, token holders will try to spend
their time and skills on more productive and value-adding tasks.
Importantly, because the DAO structure functions without
supervisors, DAO token holders who decide they cannot add value
on a given task can move to more productive endeavors that better
utilize their skills without any penalties that would exist in the
traditional hierarchical corporate structure.
Politics in the DAO structure have a different nature compared with
traditional hierarchical corporate structures. In a traditional
corporate hierarchy, position in the hierarchy and associated
authority determine effort. In other word, the supervisor in the
hierarchical structure can determine where, what, and when workers
have to perform, resulting in suboptimal outcomes, attendance of
unproductive and useless meetings, among many other negative
effects. By contrast, in the decentralized DAO environment,
influence is determined by the value a given token holder
contributed to a project’s success.
5. Maintaining the Fluidity of Decentralized Order
The values and core belief systems of DAO members provide
cohesion and longevity in decentralized systems. For example,
contributors to Wikipedia share a common belief in the power of
the crowd, that is, that decentralized collaboration for the pursuit of
knowledge creates superior outputs. They collaborate because their
values and core beliefs in knowledge creation unite them in a
common cause.
The desire to be connected via a DAO to like-minded individuals
has two core value propositions. First, individuals elect to join a
DAO and thus signal their desire to cooperate in a decentralized
network. Second, individuals select their particular DAO based on
their values and interests. DAO members will choose to join a DAO
if it corresponds with their existing inclinations, values, knowledge
base, and belief system. If the DAO also elicits and uses
individuals’ particular skillsets that reinforces their belief system,
such as coding for people who believe in the freedom of
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
decentralized systems, the DAO can be a very strong force for value
reinforcements.
DAOs need values shared by the DAO members to unify them and
to guarantee stability of cooperation while maintaining a
decentralized structure. The values that unite DAO members are not
only a determining factor for membership and cohesion, they also
ensure the longevity of the DAO and its continual evolution. Groups
that are not united by values disintegrate and perish. DAOs derive
unity from common goals and aspirations beyond protocols.
For example, in the early 2020s, most DAO initiatives and their
respective members were driven by a desire to create some sort of
alternative open society that is less controlled by existing power
structures. The underlying value and desire for freedom and change
unites the DAO communities and as they evolve.
Unifying values increase efficiency in the DAO. The power of the
DAO is instantiated and perpetuated through the individualized
power centers in DAOs that morph into decentralized organization
when the powers become correlated, aligned by a common
principle, a transcendental goal. Individual DAO members may
begin to partially imitate each other as they seek to progress toward
the common goal. Individually and technologically the individuals
and nodes of the chaotic network respond to this transcendental
calling as they unite in purpose. This newfound harmony makes the
group more efficient than before as they find varying ways to
cooperate in more complex behaviors.
The longevity of DAOs depends on their ability to maintain the
fluidity and decentralized order that was possible in the initial stages
of the DAO. Without continual efforts to maintain decentralized
order, values that initially unite DAO members have a tendency to
result in ever tighter and complex hierarchical structures in the
DAO. In the final stage, the harmony and cooperation of the
decentralized organization filters the group into an ever tighter and
complex hierarchical structure, raising some individuals into
positions of power over others. Eventually, a tree structure emerges,
a fully centralized organization. This filtering process towards
centralization is often the result of competition, calculated
allocation of power, or otherwise matching the position to the
appropriate individual’s talents within the DAO. If the hierarchy is
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

successfully completed, all individuals find their positions of power
statically fixed and the levers of power clear. This end stage is a
completely centralized organization, with the top of the hierarchy
being the center of power.
III. DAO Limitations
In 2020, DAOs are still subject to significant limitations. Such
limitation’s origins can be summarized as path dependencies,
regulatory uncertainty, lingering suboptimal incentive designs,
public policy, as well as market-, economic-, and technical
limitations.
For example, a public policy problem would arise if DAOs are used
for illicit or otherwise undesirable purposes. The anonymous nature
of DAOs opens up the possibility of a DAO being used for
undesirable purposes, such as to evade federal regulations, or
coordinate social resistance and terrorism.78 However, the vast
majority of blockchain-driven projects are aimed to serve the
common good.79
Economic problems that may be associated with DAO concepts
include the consequences of decentralized decision making and
impact on corporate culture. Decision making driven by consensus
can cause problems.80 For example, majority voting may lead
voters to compromise the lowest common denominator level
amongst the group, resulting in mediocre outcomes.81 Decentralized
78 See, e.g. Kyung Taeck Minn, Towards Enhanced Oversight of “Self-
Governing” Decentralized Autonomous Organizations: Case Study of the DAO
and Its Shortcomings, 9 N.Y.U. J. OF INTELL. PROP. & ENT. L. 139, 165-67 (2019).
79 See, e.g. forthcoming Kaal publication on Blockchain for Good (2021).
80 William Mougayar, Cut the Consensus: You Can’t Run a Business Like a
Blockchain, COINDESK (Feb. 27, 2020), https://www.coindesk.com/cut-the-
consensus-you-cant-run-a-business-like-a-blockchain.
81 Mougayar, supra note 80; see also Philip Ball, ‘Wisdom of the Crowd’: The
Myths and Realities, BBC FUTURE (Jul. 7, 2014),
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20140708-when-crowd-wisdom-goes-
wrong.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
business entities may negatively impact corporate culture.82 On the
market side, the efficiency-driven nature of DAOs could create
hypercompetitive markets which would benefit consumers, but if
DAOs outperform human-run companies, they could not only
become monopolies or oligopolies, but could also skirt regulations
prohibiting price fixing or collusion.83
Technical vulnerabilities of DAOs include cyber security, voting
procedure, and voter manipulation.84 The immutable nature of
blockchain ledgers could also make the DAO vulnerable to attacks
because it is so difficult to alter the essential construction of the
DAO once the system is in operation, should a bug in the code
arise.85
1. Path Dependencies
The original DAO has a lasting impact on emerging DAO designs.
It creates core commonalities and associated path dependencies in
futures generations of DAOs. The core common denominator for all
DAO token members is the unifying desire to optimize the DAO
token value. Accordingly, performance assessment in the DAO
structure is based on value optimization not on hierarchical or
political processes. On the upside, token holders and contractors
work towards a common goal of optimizing the DAO and the token
value and non-performance reputational penalties are free from
racial or cultural biases and associated implications as the token
holders are unlikely to even know each other. Yet, the focus on the
value enhancement of fungible tokens can lead to short termism and
may ignore ethical and governance issues.
DAO developers are also subject to path dependencies which
undermines the evolution of decentralized DAO designs. The
communication structures in organizations will invariably influence
future designs. While groups of DAO developers certainly
influence DAO designs with their collective assumptions about how
82 Carla L. Reyes, If Rockefeller Were a Coder, 87 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 373, 424-
28 (Mar. 2019).
83 For in-depth discussion, see De Filippi & Wright, supra note 69, at 154.
84 Chohan, supra note 77, at 5.
85 Chohan, supra note 77, at 5.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

their intended DAO users will engage with the DAO, the inherent
structure and approach of a group of developers building a software
solution typically has an even larger impact on DAO design. The
collective reasoning process of DAO developers is based largely on
their prior experiences with DAO software solutions which form
path dependencies. The impact of such path dependencies became
apparent in the Ethereum developer community and their attempts
at upgrading Ethereum 1.0 to 2.0 in the late 2010s.
2. Regulatory Uncertainty
Regulatory uncertainty is holding back the development of DAOs
and the optimization potential of DAOs for digital assets. For
example, the original DAO claimed to be a crowdfunding contract
and made unregistered offers and sales of DAO tokens in exchange
for Ether.86 However, the SEC began an investigation and
determined that, although the DAO claimed to be a crowdfunding
contact, it did not meet the SEC’s requirements for a Regulation
Crowdfunding exemption because the DAO is neither a broker-
dealer nor a funding portal registered with the SEC and the
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.87 In July 2017, following
this investigation, the SEC issued an investigative report stating that
virtual coins or tokens may be securities and subject to securities
laws, depending on the facts and circumstances including the
economic realities of the transaction. The SEC stated that federal
securities laws apply to those who offer and sell securities in the
United States, regardless of whether the issuing entity is a
traditional company or a decentralized autonomous organization,
regardless of whether securities are purchased using fiat or virtual
currency, regardless of whether they are distributed in certificated
form or through distributed Ledger technology. Federal securities
laws provide disclosure requirements and regulatory scrutiny aimed
at investor protection.88
86 Press Release, U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N, SEC Issues Investigative Report
Concluding DAO Tokens, a Digital Asset, Were Securities (Jul. 25, 2017) (citing
to U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Report f Investigation Pursuant to
Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO (Jul. 25, 2017)).
87 Id.
88 Id.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
Perhaps the most common and the broadest legal issue associated
with DAOs pertains to the selection of an applicable jurisdiction.
Jurisdictional issues for DAOs include the government’s ability to
enforce relevant regulations and DAO accountability through civil
liability.
DAO participants can be held personally liable for the DAO’s
liabilities if the DAO is not properly legally formed. DAOs
historically did not incorporate or officially create a corresponding
legal entity off-chain for their on-chain existence. The lack of legal
recognition of DAOs creates uncertainty as to how they would be
treated by a court should they be sued. That is, the average DAO
participants might not expect to be held liable for liabilities or
obligations of the DAO. However, a very serious risk is associated
with DAO membership in the sense that if the DAO members do
not formalize a structure for their human-created entity, courts are
very likely to impose one for the members of the DAO.89
It is possible that a DAO can be legally construed as a general
partnership or joint venture.90 Under US law, DAOs are most likely
to be treated as partnerships. A partnership is “an association of two
or more persons to carry on as co-owners a business for profit.”91
Such basic action legally forms a partnership, regardless as to
whether or not the persons intend to form a partnership.92 If no legal
entity is involved, partnership rules are default rule that apply to all
interactions between parties trying to achieve a common goal.93 No
US statute authorizes the creation of a legally distinct entity in the
form of a DAO.94 Many courts and lawyers would describe the
relationship between members of a DAO and their investors as the
default general partnership which puts every stakeholder of a DAO
89 Stephen Palley, How to Sue a DAO, LINKEDIN (Mar. 14, 2016),
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/how-sue-dao-stephen-palley; see also Reyes,
supra note 82, at 398-400.
90 See Laila Metjahic, Deconstructing the DAO: the Need for Legal Recognition
and the Application of Securities Laws to Decentralized Organizations, 39
CARDOZO L. REV. 1533, 1554 (2018).
91 U.P.A. §102 (11) (amended 2013).
92 Id. at §202(a)
93 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 6:00-6:30.
94 Amuial et. al., supra note 64, at 1.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

as liable for any debts or legal actions that the DAO may face.95
Even not-for-profit DAOs can run into legal gray areas where
participants may individually face legal liability for the activity of
the organization if a court were to consider them partners should a
litigation ensue.96 The original DAO was arguably a partnership—
a public, permission-less community-based, with on-chain
governance, and a very specific investment purpose.97 By
interacting with a smart contract, DAO members unite their efforts
and resources to achieve a certain goal, which satisfies the legal
definition of a simple partnership.98
As partners, DAO participants are potentially liable jointly and
severally for all debts, obligations, and other liabilities of the
partnership.99 That could mean that any known participants in the
DAO may be targets for regulatory enforcement or civil actions.100
However, some believe that the way in which people come together
to fund, participate, and interact with a DAO is significantly
different than that of a general partnership.101 By contrast, a limited
liability company is the only party that is liable for debts,
obligations, or other liabilities of the company.102A member or
manager is not personally liable, directly or indirectly, by way of
contribution or otherwise, for a debt, obligation or other liability of
the company solely by reason of being or acting as a member or
95 OpenLaw, The Era of Legally Compliant DAOs, MEDIUM (Jun. 26, 2019),
https://medium.com/@OpenLawOfficial/the-era-of-legally-compliant-daos-
491edf88fed0.
96 The LAO, supra note 33.
97 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 4:10-5:30. For full
discussion of The DAO as a general partnership, see Metjahic, supra note 90, at
1546.
98 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 5:30-6:00.
99 U.P.A., supra note 91, at §306 (a).
100 Chohan, supra note 77, at 3.
101 For full discussion of business organizations and DAOs, see Amuial, et al.,
supra note 64; see also Alexandra Sims, Blockchain and Decentralised
Autonomous Organisations (DAOs): The Evolution of Companies?, NEW
ZEALAND UNIVERSITIES L. REV. (forthcoming 2019); on capitalization structures
and DAOs, see Reyes, supra note 82 at 414-18, 419-22 (discusses DAO as
business trust).
102 U.L.L.C.A. § 304(a) (Unif. Law Comm’n 1997).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
manager.103 In order to form an LLC, a certificate of organization is
filed with the Secretary of State.104
The application of the legal concept of fiduciary duties is less clear
in DAOs. Fiduciary duties may require a fund manager to act in the
best interests of their client.105 In the traditional regulatory
infrastructure fiduciary duties often function to overcome the
corporate governance problems associated with the separation of
ownership and control.106 However, in a DAO, because of the
value-to-effort focus of workflows in the DAO structure,
supervision and imposition of legal duties are less clearly
applicable. DAO token holders optimize the DAO together
according to their individualized value propositions in accordance
with their unique skillsets, backgrounds, and training.
Another legal risk associated with DAOs pertains to the legal
recourse for third parties who contract with a DAO. In lieu of
partner liability, it is less clear who a liable party may be in a DAO.
Without clearly defined liability rules, third parties and investors in
DAOs may have less clearly defined legal recourse.107 While DAO
dispute settlement is relatively predictable on-chain,108 settlement
off-chain is less predictable.109 Parties may be able to limit remedies
to DAO assets through private agreements. But, if the DAO should
face a tort suit such an agreement is unlikely to be upheld.110
103 Id.
104 Id. at § 201 (a). For more on limited liability protection and blockchain, see
De Filippi & Wright, supra note 69, at 141-42.
105 Patrick Eha and Tanaya Macheel, What the Attack on the DAO Means for
Banks, AMERICAN BANKER (Jun. 20, 2016) (quoting Kirill Gourov, Expand
Research analyst and “early bitcoin adopter.”)
106 Kaal, supra note 57, at 23.
107 Eha & Macheel, supra note 105 again quoting Kirill Gourov; see also Chohan,
supra note 77, at 4.
108Peter Van Valkenburgh, What Does It Mean to Issue a Token “On Top Of”
Ethereum?, COINCENTER (May 10, 2017),
https://www.coincenter.org/education/crypto-regulation-faq/what-does-it-mean-
to-issue-a-token-on-top-of-ethereum/.
109 Id.
110 Ross Campbell, E-Commerce with Legal and Blockchain Security, MEDIUM:
GOOD AUDIENCE (Jan. 26, 2019), https://blog.goodaudience.com/e-commerce-
with-legal-and-blockchain-security-6f2ba6c244a3
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

Applying a common legal anchor and traditional jurisdictional
principles to cybernetic systems is near impossible because the
status of the cybernetic system is constantly changing. Cybernetic
systems are constantly changing and less amenable to jurisdictional
reach. For example, Ethereum was launched as a foundation111 in
order to have sufficient funds to further promote112 and propose the
genesis block to the community.113 After it launched, the
community had to decide which version of the protocol they desired
to adopt and use.114 Such community choices make the application
of jurisdictional principles and a legal anchor governance
structure115 less clear for cybernetic systems. Exacerbating things,
cybernetic systems often involve counterparties that do not
concurrently exist.116 Therefore, web interfaces add centralization
elements which make a legal anchor more critical because that is
what traditional lawyers look for to analyze the system and apply
jurisdictional principles.117 For example, with The DAO, the
financial markets authority in Switzerland did not look at the
functionality of the smart contract but how the DAO was sold,
promoted, and displayed.118
The application of securities laws is less clear for DAOs.
Traditional organizations are subject to risk and compliance
controls around fund withdrawal.119 Under current laws, DAOs
solely governed by smart contracts are restricted in their ability to
pool assets and generate profit because securities laws limit their
ability to fund ecosystem development and deploy capital
efficiently.120 The SEC published a report finding that the DAO’s
tokens were securities, meaning that they were required to register
with the SEC and be subject to federal securities regulations.121 A
security (“investment contract”) is defined as “an investment of
111 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 37:51-37:51.
112 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17 at 40:21-40:34.
113 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 37:51-40:12
114 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 40:12-40:21
115 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 40:34-40.
116 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 42:40-43:00
117 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 43:00-43:30.
118 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 43:30-43:49.
119 Eha & Macheel, supra note 105 (quoting Kirill Gourov).
120 The LAO, supra note 33.
121 Press Release, SEC, supra note 86.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
money in a common enterprise with a reasonable expectation of
profits to be derived from the entrepreneurial or managerial efforts
of others.”122 This is a very fact-specific analysis, which requires
thorough investigation or discovery in litigation to even determine
whether a given token meets the definition of a security.123 Certain
ICOs have since been classified as securities offerings, but in
addition to federal securities laws, state law may treat the issuance
of tokens differently.124 In essence, for participants in a DAO, all of
these factors combined lead to uncertainty, and potential liability
for failing to comply with federal securities regulations, which are
designed to protect investors.125
3. Suboptimal Incentive Design
Despite the abovementioned seemingly optimized DAO
governance structures, lacking decentralized governance solutions
affect the application of decentralized systems on multiple levels.
Decentralized networks depend on dynamic governance. As
blockchains protocols evolve in a given market, they require
updates. At the beginning of the 2020s, basic standards for the
governance of digital assets were still missing. Efforts to provide
more legal certainty through regulatory carve-outs were mostly
tentative and lacked sufficient regulatory support or voting
majorities in the regulatory agencies. The evolution of the digital
asset market necessitates certainty for market participants. Without
standards and governance, certainty and the associated market
confidence cannot develop.
Chain forks with all their negative effects were still a reality and
common practice for blockchain protocol upgrades in the early
122 SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293, 301 (1946).
123 Timothy Nielsen, Note, Cryptocorporations: A Proposal for Legitimizing
Decentralizing Autonomous Organizations, 2019 UTAH L. REV. at 8-9
(forthcoming 2019-20).
124 Sven Riva, Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) as Subjects of
Law – the Recognition of DAOs in the Swill Legal Order (Oct. 2019)
(unpublished master’s thesis, University of Neuchatel (one file with author)
(citing SEC Spotlight on ICOs and Dewey Josias, USA, p. 479).
125 See also Joel S. Telpner & Thomas M. Ahmadifar, ICOs, The DAO, and the
Investment Company Act of 1940, 24 INVESTMENT LAWYER, 16, (2017); Amuial,
et al., supra note 64, at § 4.5.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

2020s. While sometimes forks were merely used to test a process or
upgrade, forking was most often used to implement new
characteristics for digital asset or to create a fundamental protocol
change. The bifurcation of nodes in a given decentralized network
can lead to significant economic loss, errors, confusion, and bugs.
For example, the bifurcation of network nodes can result in the
reemergence of the double spend problem that the previous network
had overcome. Users running the pre-fork code consider the post-
fork code invalid, they cannot detect the spending on the post-fork
code. Correspondingly, cryptocurrencies spent in a post-fork block
could be spent again on a pre-fork block. Similarly, fork-related
changes in protocol parameters such as the block size or the
difficulty of the cryptographic puzzle can result in certain blocks
being accepted by the post-fork protocol but rejected by the pre-fork
versions of the protocol which may result in the loss of funds. The
economic loss associated with such parallel existence can be quite
significant. Finally, the fork that created Bitcoin Cash illustrates the
risk of contention and the associated social and political turmoil
post fork that necessitates blockchain reorganization. Post Bitcoin
Cash fork, the Bitcoin community could not agree on the chain that
provided the most survivable protocol. As a result of contention,
two blockchains, e.g. Bitcoin and Bitcoin Cash compete in
perpetuity with the resulting social and economic loss for each
chain.
DAO governance lacked proper incentive designs at the beginning
of the 2020s. At the beginning of the 2020s, most DAOs utilized
centralized forms of master nodes to institute blockchain protocol
and DAO upgrades. Human nature and any effective machine
derivates of human engagements in institutional form require a
duality of incentives in order to overcome attempts of rational and
opportunistic internal and external constituents to game the
governance design of a given DAO. The duality of incentives
consists of a) incentives for actors to improve their own utility,
while at the same time b) actors’ actions benefit the entirety of the
institution and its constituents for the long run.
DAO designs at the beginning of the 2020s did not effectively
master this duality. Moreover, then existing DAO designs did not
effectively use non-fungible assets to overcome corruptive
elements. When fungible assets are used as the dominant incentive
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
design in the governance of DAOs with identifiable actors, rational
and opportunistic internal constituents and external participants will
typically attempt to corrupt the governance design of the DAO for
their own gain. Similarly, the identity of actors in a DAO
governance design creates typically corruptive elements. Merit
identifiers other than individual identity remove the most corruptive
influences. At the beginning of the 2020s, no then-existing DAO
design had effectively conceptualized and applied an anonymous
merit identifier with non-fungible decentralized assets.
IV. Governance & Legal Design Experimentation
In the 2020s, legal designs of DAOs are still largely relegated to
experimentation. Such experimentation is natural and useful for the
evolution of DAO concepts. Trial and failure of legal DAO designs
create a natural filtering mechanism for successful DAO designs.
Importantly, the experimentation with DAO legal designs, that is,
legal designs that allow DAOs to interact with the real world in a
legal construct, can go hand in hand with internal DAO governance
designs.
Any experimentation with DAO legal solutions has the ultimate
objective of accomplishing the highest level of decentralization.
Lasting legal solutions for DAOs have to increase and maintain the
internal and external decentralization accomplished in the DAO.
DAOs cannot exist and persist without ever increasing degrees of
decentralization. Therefore, first and foremost, DAO legal designs
need to supplement the internal decentralization accomplished by
the DAO.
Supplementing internal DAO decentralization is perhaps the most
serious challenge for DAO legal designs. Existing legal solutions
for DAOs typically require forms of legal representation in the
respective jurisdiction. Jurisdictional requirements pertaining to
legal representation are always a point of centralization. Tying the
legal existence of a DAO to any forms of existing legal and
jurisdictional frameworks typically results in the need for a
representative in the chosen legal framework and jurisdiction,
which in turn centralizes the DAO and can result in the long-term
failure of the respective DAO concept. Representation
requirements, however, are a natural DAO anchoring mechanism
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

for a given jurisdiction that allows the respective jurisdiction to
exercise jurisdiction and control over the DAO.
Surrendering jurisdiction over DAOs while giving DAOs legal
status and limited liability will be the epitome and linchpin for DAO
legal solutions. Surrendering control over DAOs while giving them
a legal status in the given jurisdiction may be accomplished some
day, if and when jurisdictions recognize the importance of DAO
constructs for business relationships. However, tying the legal
status recognition to forms of limited liability while surrendering
jurisdiction over the DAO is perhaps less likely. Giving a DAO
legal recognition and limited liability in a given jurisdiction would
require the legislature to acknowledge that third parties in that
jurisdiction who may interact with the limited liability DAO would
only have limited recourse if things go wrong in the legal
relationship. Because consumer protection is a core mandate for any
legislature, it seems less likely that they will surrender control and
jurisdiction over the DAO which includes no legal recourse,
inability to sue in national courts etc, while also giving the DAO
limited liability in that jurisdiction. Even if adequate alternative
dispute resolution systems should emerge for DAO and smart
contracting disputes, it remains unclear if these can suffice from a
consumer protection perspective in most jurisdictions.
Combining internal DAO governance with a legal concept has
several advantages. First, a DAO with a legal wrapper enables the
DAO’s operations in the real world and beyond. A DAO needs a
legal wrapper representing the DAO in the sense that a DAO cannot
rent an office or sign a contract that can only happen on paper. 126
Second, the legal entity that represents the DAO in the real world
can benefit from the DAO’s on-chain governance.127 The on-chain
governance of the DAO gives the legal entity a form of
decentralized democratic legitimacy while at the same time not
requiring internal democratic processes within such legal entity.
The legal anchor, e.g. the legal wrapper, creates a form of needed
centralization between decentralized technical functionality, legal
relevance, and legal definition. Organizing based on functional
126 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 25:10-25:46.
127 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 25:10-25:46.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
technicalities runs participants into legal risks.128 For example, a
smart contract can have a basic element of an organization and
hence could be qualified as a minimum simple partnership, and
never be a legal entity as such.129 In this context, the legal anchor
reduces risks and increases legal certainty for the DAO and third
parties that transact with the DAO because the DAO would be
represented through the legal wrapper.130 Using the legal wrapper
concept, the individual DAO members would not be liable and the
third party knows exactly with whom she is interacting and where
liabilities arise.
Incremental improvements of DAO governance can include
multiple measures. Those measures can include releasing smart
contracts in stages. In earlier stages the contract is more controlled
and easily updated by a set of cryptographic, multi-signature
notaries.131 In later stages, the control over the contract is released
at an increasing rate. Certification processes and review processes
as well as multiple security audits from respected institutions in
combination with formal verification programs for smart contracts
are additional possible governance improvement solutions for
DAOs.132 Design changes can include so called tripwires or
arbitration and mediation under adverse conditions or designing the
DAO such that it can be stopped when it may appear to become too
big to fail. Barriers to DAO entry can help ensure the success of on-
chain governance, such as with permissioned blockchains or
community guidelines (different tiers for different contracts).133
1. Governance
Most cryptocurrencies would not exist if Bitcoin and Ethereum had
effective incentives for future protocol development and
128 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 16:15-16:30.
129 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 53:01-53:24.
130 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 16:30-16:55.
131 Kyle Torpey, They Might Be Smart, But These Contracts Need to Be More
Secure, American Banker Vol. 181 Iss. 140 Jul. 22, 2016 (discussing RSK Labs).
132 Torpey, supra note 40.
133 Torpey, supra note 40.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

governance built into the core protocol.134 Common core
denominators of existing problems in governance design include the
corruptive effects of existing governance designs with fungible
assets as well as the identity of actors in governance designs. These
factors, among many others, contributed to the resulting inability to
govern institutions effectively.
DAO governance structures are built on software, code and smart
contracts that run on public decentralized blockchain platforms, such
as Ethereum. DAOs typically do not have a physical address as they
merely compute code. Because of these code-based features, DAOs
are not organizations with a traditional hierarchy as known from
traditional corporate structures where authority and empowerment
flow downwards from investors/shareholders through a board of
directors to management and eventually staff. Indeed, DAOs
typically do not have directors, managers, or employees. Because a
series of smart contracts grants DAO token holders voting rights, the
blockchain-based smart contracts imitates the role of articles of
association or bylaws and the entirety of a precedent system that
would otherwise be provided by default in a jurisdiction-based legal
structure. Because DAO code is typically open source, the token
holders not only vote on investment and/or work proposals, but also
on any change made to the code. Accepted proposals would also be
backed by a software code, defining the relationship (in terms of
rights, obligations, and performance metrics) between the respective
DAO and the accepted and funded work proposals.
The technological infrastructure of decentralized systems enables
unprecedented decentralized governance incentive designs that can
create solutions that could not so far be accomplished in centralized
governance structures. Unlike centralized governance incentive
design, decentralized incentive alignment in a DAO have the
potential to be organized in an incorruptible way with non-fungible
digital assets. Efficiently designed DAO governance helps
overcome collective action problems associated with lacking
incentive alignment in existing agency-based governance designs.
134 Naval Ravikant (@Naval), TWITTER (Apr. 13, 2018, 9:55 PM),
https://twitter.com/naval/status/985018594252742656.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
Community audits are a key element in DAO governance.
Centralized systems rarely provide for and administer community-
driven audits. Community-driven audits go against the agency and
monitoring principles embedded in the centralized governance.
External monitoring and validation are key in centralized
governance systems because the incentive design in centralized
structures does not enable incorruptible internal controls. By
contrast, community audits are at the core of DAO governance. The
decentralized nature of DAOs enhances efficiency of coordination
because the users of the system, e.g. DAO members, typically know
best how to assess other users / DAO members. The decentralized
DAO structure enables unprecedented information symmetry in the
governance design because governance information, e.g. DAO
group decision making metrics and DAO governance protocol
needs, is at the edge of the decentralized system and is exchanged
and evaluated directly between DAO members in a continuous and
iterative stream of information that provides dynamic feedback
effects.
Governance upgrades in DAOs enable a different kind of agency
relationship. Because of the smart contract coordination of agency
relationships, traditional control mechanisms employed by
principals in agency relationships can be scaled back and partially
be removed. DAO workers are engaged in a dynamic set of working
relationships that continuously and dynamically self-organize
around projects and outcomes, not corporate hierarchies with
implicit hierarchical biases.
The DAO governance optimization makes traditional uses of
fiduciary duties less relevant. The traditional regulatory
infrastructure that attempts to overcome the corporate governance
problems associated with the separation of ownership (shareholders)
and control (management) relies heavily on fiduciary duties. Those
directors and officers who violate their fiduciary obligations in
centralized organizations by not acting in the best interest of the
corporation can be sued. In the DAO structure such duties and
litigation-based control mechanisms are less relevant. Because of the
value to effort focus of workflows in the DAO structure, supervision
of management and imposition of legal duties on management is less
needed because there are fewer or no supervisors. Rather, token
holders optimize the DAO together according to their best value
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

propositions in accordance with their unique skillsets, backgrounds,
and training.
a) Dynamic Elements
Dynamic elements in DAO governance help avoid otherwise
inevitable corruptive influences. In any open and democratic
system, naturally opportunistic rational parties will attempt to
circumvent and game the sets of applicable complex static rules to
increase their share of power and profit within the system. Stable
and presumptively optimal static and/or constitutional rules for
DAO governance therefore typically enable gaming and arbitrage
opportunities. To enable sufficient protection of DAO members
while at the same time allowing for DAO enhancements, the static
sets of rules of smart contracts in such a system will need to be
rather complex. With static complex sets of DAO rules comes
inevitable corruptive opportunistic gaming and arbitrage behavior.
To avoid these negative effects of static complex DAO rules,
effective DAO governance designs should be focused on dynamic
elements. Dynamic elements here include DAO members’ ability to
re-evaluate existing precedent in the system.
DAO design can enable a code-based governance infrastructure that
can create dynamic governance protocol upgrades in real-time
through dynamic feedback loops. The technological infrastructure
underpinning DAOs enables autonomous and evolutionary
incomplete smart contract upgrades. With dynamic DAO
governance mechanisms, DAO token holders can vote for a change
of any outdated or flawed code as the flaws materialize or in
anticipation of future contingencies.
Unlike centralized legal structures that rely on ex-ante majoritarian
rules that are presumed to be stable and optimal, DAOs can generate
majoritarian rules ex-post without the need for ex-ante majoritarian
rules that function as default rules.135 Presumptively stable ex-ante
majoritarian rules are flawed because they are inevitably suboptimal
in an ever-changing environment that evolves from the environment
that precipitated the promulgation of the ex-ante majoritarian rule.
Ex-post code-based majoritarian rules are superior to ex-ante
135 Contra see supra Part II.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
majoritarian rules because they are based on more accurate real-
time information from the edge and decentralized feedback effects.
Ex-post code-based majoritarian rules are not subject to the same
information asymmetries as stable and presumptively optimal ex-
ante rules. As such, DAOs enable a code-based governance
infrastructure that can create dynamic governance protocol
upgrades in real-time through dynamic feedback loops.
b) On-Chain Governance
On-chain governance is a necessity for most public blockchains.
Because all existing blockchains need to calibrate soft forks for
protocol upgrades, most public blockchain communities have
considered on-chain governance proposal in some form. Those
proposals included Bitcoin Improvement Proposals,136 Ethereum
Improvement Proposals,137 Ethereum General Assembly,138 mailing
lists,139 and suggestion pages on GitHub trees.140 Certain protocols
have expanded their on-chain governance considerations. These
include, but are not limited to: Tendermint,141 PolkaDot,142
136 Bitcoin Improvement Proposals, WIKIPEDIA (last visited Aug. 19, 2019)
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Bitcoin_Improvement_Proposals.
137 Adam Reese, Ethereum Dev Yoichi Hirai Steps Away From Role As EIP
Editor, Raises Questions About Process, ETHNEWS: ECOSYSTEM (Feb. 15,
2018), https://www.ethnews.com/ethereum-dev-yoichi-hirai-steps-away-from-
role-as-eip-editor-raises-questions-ab (for a good argument from the former EIP
editor that the EIP system is dangerous, who has since retired based on his
serious concerns).
138 Gavofyork, Yellow Paper Committee, GITHUB (Apr. 10, 2016),
https://github.com/gavofyork/curly-engine.
139 LISTS.OZLABS.ORG, https://lists.ozlabs.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev-moderation/
(last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
140 E.g., Aragon Network, supra note 43.
141 Ethan Buchman, Tendermint: Byzantine Fault Tolerance in the Age of
Blockchains (June 2016) (unpublished A.A.S. thesis, University of Guelph),
https://atrium.lib.uoguelph.ca/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10214/9769/Buchman_Et
han_201606_MAsc.pdf?sequence=7&isAllowed=y.
142 Rachel Rose O’Leary, Polkadot’s Plan for Governing a Blockchain of
Blockchains, COINDESK (Mar. 22, 2018, 1:10 UTC),
https://www.coindesk.com/polkadots-radical-plan-governing-blockchain-
blockchains/ (“the internal token of the Polkadot network, allows its holders to
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAOstack,143 Tezos,144 Dash,145 Bitshares, Lisk, MemoryCoin,
Aragon,146 Cardano,147 Maker,148 and NuShares.149 The blockchain
community continues to debate the preferable modus operandi for
protocol changes.150
Despite the ever-widening need for on-chain governance solutions,
arguments against on-chain governance remain strong. In an off-
chain governance model, miners provide checks and balances on
power over protocol changes. On-chain governance arguably
removes such checks and balances. An on-chain governance model
also arguably would take the participation of governance away from
vote directly on a piece of code, which will then automatically upgrade across
the network.”).
143 DAOstack, An Operating System for Collective Intelligence, (White Paper
V1.1, April 22, 2018), https://daostack.io/wp/DAOstack-White-Paper-en.pdf.
144 Tezos, Tezos-Papers, GITHUB (Oct. 25, 2016),
https://github.com/tezos/tezos-papers.
145Joel Valenzuela, Dash Surges to Record High, Claims $0.5 Mln Monthly
Development Budget, COINTELEGRAPH (Mar. 13, 2017),
https://cointelegraph.com/news/dash-surges-to-record-high-claims-05-mln-
monthly-development-budget. Decentralized Governance by Blockchain
includes a system where “masternodes” have voting power and control of a
development budget that takes 10% of the mined profit, which they claim
amounted to more than $500,00 US per month in March 2017. However,
masternodes can have incentives that are not always aligned with other users so
that such on-chain governance may skew the development of the platform in
unhealthy ways.
146 Luis Cuende & Jorge Izquierdo, Aragon Network: A Decentralized
Infrastructure for Value Exchange, White Paper (April 20, 2017),
https://www.chainwhy.com/upload/default/20180705/49f3850f2702ec6be0f577
80b22feab2.pdf.
147 CARDANO, https://www.cardano.org/en/academic-papers/ (last visited Aug.
19, 2019).
148 MAKERDAO, https://makerdao.com/ (last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
149 NUBITS, https://nubits.com/nushares (last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
150 E.g., see this discussion: Buck Perley, Crypto-Governance and the Dangers
of Faction, MEDIUM (Oct. 27, 2017), https://medium.com/@BuckPerley/crypto-
governance-f1318affbbe0; Fred Ehrsam, Blockchain Governance:
Programming Our Future, MEDIUM (Nov. 27, 2017),
https://medium.com/@FEhrsam/blockchain-governance-programming-our-
future-c3bfe30f2d74; Vlad Zamfir, Against On-chain Governance, MEDIUM
(Dec. 1, 2017), https://medium.com/@Vlad_Zamfir/against-on-chain-
governance-a4ceacd040ca; Vitalik Buterin, Notes on Blockchain Governance,
VITALIK.CA (Dec. 17, 2017), https://vitalik.ca/general/2017/12/17/voting.html.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
miners and subsequently users. Because on-chain governance
enables automatic protocol upgrades and is not dependent on
manual interference by miners, miners are no longer required to
make a conscious choice to participate in their chosen chain.151
Moreover, an off-chain governance system that finds an equilibrium
between several competing factors could be a better alternative for
protocol governance than an on-chain governance mechanism.152
In the early 2020s, on-chain voting mechanisms were still largely in
their infancy. Most on-chain voting mechanisms and governance
designs mostly resembled a plutocracy. Suboptimal voting
outcomes in existing decentralized protocols were associated with
the then popular one-token-one-vote voting mechanisms. A one-
token-one-vote design allocates more power to token holders who
have a significant share of the total supply of a given token.
Majority token holders have more power than the rest of the token
holders combined. These structures reintroduce many of the
downsides and suboptimal incentive allocations of one-share-one
vote designs in legacy systems of the early 21st century.
More mature voting alternatives are slowly emerging. Such
alternative DAO voting designs can ameliorate the traditional
voting power corruption of one-token-one-vote. Alternative voting
methods include quadratic voting,153 futarchy,154 liquid
151 In off-chain governance models node operators have to update their client
manually for a protocol upgrade to align with the new chain.
152 Buterin, supra note 150 (arguing factors to be considered for an off-chain
governance system include: consensus among development team, initial
roadmap, coin holder voting, user voting with some kind of Sybil resistant polling
system, and established norms).
153 Steven Lalley & Eric Glen Weyl, Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism
Design Can Radicalize Democracy, (Dec. 24, 2017),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2003531; Kristopher Jones, Blockchain In or As
Governance? Evolutions in Experimentation, Social Impacts, and Prefigurative
Practice in the Blockchain and DAO Space, 24 INFORMATION POLITY 469, 474
(2019) (citing D. Allen, C. Berg, A. Lane, and J. Potts, The Economics of
Crypto-Democracy, LINKDEM@IJCAI 63-73 (2017)).
154 Robin Hanson, Futarchy: Vote Values, But Bet Beliefs, GEO. MASON U.,
http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/futarchy.html (last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

democracy,155 and reputation-based voting as an instantiation of
non-fungible voting.156 These emerging more mature voting
ecosystems enable on-chain protocol governance with an incentive
design that more optimally balances risk and rewards of voting.
On-chain governance models can further be optimized with
reputation-based staking as voting mechanisms.157 Reputation-
based voting revolves around voting by way of staking a non-
fungible asset, aka staking non-fungible reputation tokens in a given
DAO, towards a certain outcome. The corruptive elements of
fungible assets/tokens are removed because third parties are less
likely able to take over a non-fungible asset, such as reputation, that
is organically grown and maintained through actual expertise in a
given DAO subject matter. Even if third parties should be able to
take over or purchase non-fungible reputation, they are less likely
able to maintain the reputation score and the associated revenue
stream of fungible assets over time.
2. Legal Designs
The legal setup for a DAO is determined by several core
considerations that pertain to the type of DAO interaction that is to
be governed. The purpose of the DAO often drives DAO
governance. For instance, different governance designs may apply
to DAOs that focus on investment purposes versus DAOs that focus
on membership rights, voting mechanisms, or DAOs that are
allocating certain assets to a certain purpose. The degree of DAO
governance and its implementation on-chain, governed by smart
contracts, or off-chain is perhaps one of the first considerations.
DAO governance functions, such as voting rights and dividend
distributions, can be implemented on-chain and synchronized off-
155 Delegative Democracy, WIKIPEDIA,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delegative_democracy (last visited Aug. 19,
2019).
156 Craig Calcaterra, Wulf A. Kaal, and Andrei, Vlad, Blockchain Infrastructure
for Measuring Domain Specific Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and
Anonymous Systems (February 18, 2018). U of St. Thomas (Minnesota) Legal
Studies Research Paper No. 18-11, Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.312
5822
157 Id.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
chain. A minimum written proof of existence, such as Articles of
Association, can be the only off-chain link, but may be required to
connect on-chain governance with the off-chain necessities.
Another core consideration pertains to DAO project-specific
governance or governance of the whole network. Communication
methods for DAO members are often determined based on whether
the governance is permissionless and community-based, or via a
permissioned-community with one coordinator.
a) OpenLaw - LAO
Limited liability DAOs have become a trend in DAO legal design.
Limited liability DAOs incorporate as LLCs in order to optimize
their smart contract and DeFi applications, while maintaining
traditional controls over business risks and membership.158 The first
limited liability DAO experiment organized in New York was
OpenEsquire, a hybrid organization combining the liability-limiting
public legal fictions (LLC-DAO) with the private ordering benefits
of Ethereum.159 Open, ESQ LLC provides pragmatic Solidity
solutions for legal engineering of DAOs.160
In 2018, Vermont added a Blockchain-based Limited Liability
Companies provision to the Corporations Title of their state
statutes.161 In June 2019, dOrg, the second limited liability DAO,
was launched under this law, organized in Vermont.162 dOrg first
158 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
159 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
160 OpenEsq, GITHUB, https://github.com/open-esq (last visited July 10, 2020).
For a tutorial of how to create a DAO using the OpenLaw LLC-DAO Operating
Agreement written by two US-licensed attorneys, see, Ross Campbell, E-
Commerce with Legal and Blockchain Security, Medium Good Audience (Jan.
26, 2019) (using OpenLaw,
https://lib.openlaw.io/web/default/template/New%20York%20LLC%20Articles
%20of%20Organization).
161 11 V.S.A. § 4173; see e.g. Stan Higgins, Vermont Governor Signs Bill
Clearing Way for Blockchain Companies, COINDESK (May 31, 2018),
https://www.coindesk.com/vermontdao-state-governor-signs-bill-clearing-way-
blockchain-companies.
162 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108 (citing https://twitter.com/dOrg_tech)
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

deployed the DAO to the blockchain then formed a blockchain-
based limited liability company (BBLLC).163
OpenLaw publishes legal templates to help DAOs limit their
liability by creating a “corporate veil” for the DAO. An LLC
Operating Agreement is available for consumers on the OpenLaw
website.164 OpenLaw implements a Ricardian contract system165 to
bridge traditional legal regimes with the Ethereum world by
permitting users to create binding legal agreements and tie them to
the execution of a smart contract.166 Moreover, OpenLaw offers a
legal wrapper library to generate digital tokens to reflect group
membership and network utility.167 OpenLaw offers interactive
forms to easily deploy limited liability DAOs based on
OpenEsquire and dOrg legal forms.168 OpenLaw is contemplating
collaborative service offerings, research publications, and best-
practice summaries to aid more effective use of the Library.169
OpenLaw also offers templates for DAO business transactions
including consulting, NDAs, memos of understandings, and code
deference.170 OpenLaw also offers Token Forge forms enabling
users to contribute to research.171
OpenLaw created an OpenLaw DAO172 which was a DAO set up as
a traditional legal entity using binding legal agreements to
effectuate asset transfer and other functions. OpenLaw’s new
vertical DAO contains an easy to use set of features to rapidly build
and deploy limited liability DAOs. For example, OpenLaw
published a video, walking users through the creation of a DAO
163 dOrg Launches First Limited Liability DAO, GRAVEL & SHEA (Jun. 2019),
https://www.gravelshea.com/2019/06/dorg-launches-first-limited-liability-dao/.
164 See, e.g., Limited Liability Company Operating Agreement Open, Esq LLC,
https://lib.openlaw.io/web/default/template/LLC-
DAO%20Operating%20Agreement.
165 Ian Grigg, The Ricardian Contract, IANG.ORG (2004),
https://iang.org/papers/ricardian_contract.html
166 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
167 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
168 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
169 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
170 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
171 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
172 DAO, OPENLAW (2019) https://dao.openlaw.io/ (last accessed Jun. 22, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
organized as a Limited Cooperative Association in Colorado.173 In
June 2019, OpenLaw created an OpenLaw DAO174 which was a
DAO set up as a traditional legal entity using binding legal
agreements to effectuate asset transfer and other functions.
In September 2019, OpenLaw announced the launch of the LAO.
The LAO will be set up as a limited liability entity organized in
Delaware,175 conforming with U.S. SEC regulations.176 The LAO is
innovative because it will be engaged in for-profit endeavors in
ways that limit the legal risk of members and aims to comply with
US Law, modifying established organizational documents to
accommodate smart contract-based corporate governance
mechanisms, while working within the current confines of the
law.177 Smart contracts will handle mechanics related to voting,
funding, and allocation of collected funds.178 The OpenLaw
protocol will generate entity formation documents and member
subscription agreements.179
The LAO is anchored by ten founding members, and other
interested parties can purchase interests potentially through a public
sale.180 OpenLaw serves as an administrator of the LAO but will
exercise no control unless directed by members.181
The LAO provides a legal structure to enable members to give
grants, invest in blockchain-based projects in exchange for
tokenized stock or utility tokens.182 Projects or Ethereum-based
projects can also receive funding within days of submission.183 That
173 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
174 Van Valkenburgh, supra note 108.
175 The LAO, supra note 33.
176 Christine Kim, New Interest in DAOs Prompts Old Question: Are They
Legal?, COINDESK.COM (Sep. 29, 2019), https://www.coindesk.com/new-
interest-in-daos-prompts-old-question-are-they-legal.
177 The LAO, Unpacking the LAO, MEDIUM (Sep. 23, 2019).
https://medium.com/openlawofficial/unpacking-the-lao-e463f7357b4b.
178 The LAO, supra, note 33.
179 The LAO, supra, note 33.
180 The LAO, supra, note 33.
181 The LAO, supra, note 33.
182 The LAO, supra, note 33.
183 The LAO, supra, note 33.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

structure is called a “legal wrapper,” which is created by structuring
the DAO as a LLC to make the entity responsible for contracts,
taxes, and violations of the law, but not the individuals acting on
behalf of that entity.184
The goal of the LAO will be to limit participant liability, provide
clarity on what law applies, and provide tax benefits (flow-
through/single taxation).185 Members purchase interests, proceeds
of which pool and are allocated by members to startups and other
projects in need of financing, using a voting mechanism similar to
MolochDAO’s.186 Rage-quitting features are also in place.187 The
LAO designed a “Minimum Viable Venture Moloch” borrowing
from “the original Moloch design that emphasizes simple Solidity
scripts for voting and other member transactions, largely relying on
off-chain coordination to scale membership and deliver funding to
promising Ethereum ventures[,]” “further imbu[ing] LAO actions
with legal effect through OpenLaw smart agreements and
establish[ing] a proxy entity.”188
A benefit beyond those offered by Moloch, LAO membership is
further incentivized because members continue to generate profits
from the portfolio holdings of the LAO. LAO members can
continuously claim their fair share of profits provided by tokens
received from projects receiving investments from the LAO.189 A
LAO can also receive funding much quicker than a traditional LLC
and can meet virtually.190
The LAO will at first only be available to a limited number of
accredited investors, which requires participants to disclose their
identities, pay taxes, and often hire legal counsel, as they would in
joining a traditional business organization.191 An accredited
184 Kim, supra note 176.
185 The LAO, supra, note 33.
186 The LAO, supra, note 33.
187 The LAO, supra, note 33.
188 OpenLawTeam, The LAO, GITHUB (Dec. 11, 2019),
https://github.com/openlawteam/TheLAO
189 The LAO, supra, note 33.
190 Kim, supra note 176.
191 Kim, supra note 176.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
investor is a set definition by the SEC.192 The LAO is exploring on-
chain verification of accredited status for the LAO using third-party
oracle services to streamline the onboarding process, such as
ChainLink.193
b) DAA
Using an existing Swiss legal construct, the DAA takes the Swiss
civil law Association and adds a decentralized smart contract layer
to replace the centralized governance process.194 The DAA
approach is a third generation DAO approach in the sense that an
existing legal construct, such as the Swiss Association, is combined
with a DAO.
A Swiss Association consists of a community of members where
each member has one vote that is not capital-driven but a voting-
driven, membership-driven legal entity.195 It is a legal entity, itself
liable for its own actions, with a corporate veil that protects
individual members from liability.196 One membership layer and
legal entity layer limiting risks for members.197A Swiss Association
is formed by a group of individuals expressing their intention to
incorporate such legal entity.198 No legal act in front of a notary or
formal registration is needed to establish a Swiss Association.199 To
start a Swiss Association, individuals come together as a group,
192 17 C.F.R. § 230.501(a) (2017).
193 The LAO, supra, note 33.
194 See also Validitylabs, Daa, GITHUB (2020),
https://github.com/validitylabs/daa/tree/web.
195 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 9:30-9:55 (Thomas
Linder swiss assn. slide).
196 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 9:55-10:10 (Thomas
Linder Swiss assn. slide).
197 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 10:10-10:35 (Thomas
Linder).
198 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 14:30-14:45 (Thomas
Linder).
199 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 14:20-14:45 (Thomas
Linder).
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

draft the statutes of association, define purpose and how the purpose
will be financed, identify membership fee.200
At the General Assembly, members can propose and vote for one
Swiss delegate who anchors the DAA to the real-world by filing tax
returns, litigating trademark issues, etc.201 All other interactions and
transactions between members and legal entity are smart-contract
based, completed by a smart-contract system in order for all
governance transactions to be decentralized.202
The DAA integrates interactions between the members and the legal
entity into smart contracts.203 An individual member can provide
funding through membership fees, donations via smart contract;204
propose and vote on projects to be supported, change of articles of
association, agenda items for General Assembly.205 The DAA has
over a dozen smart contracts interact with one another.206 Smart
contracts manage membership and use of funds;207 a “mothership”
runs treasury, proposal management, and membership functions.208
The DAA smart contract does not have a token, is membership
registry only, looks like a traditional association model with one-
member one vote.209
Although the DAA is created based on the Swiss Association legal
anchor, using a legal concept similar to the Swiss Association from
other jurisdictions to create a, for example, US DAA, would be
200 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 13:27-14:45 (Thomas
Linder).
201 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 11:40-12:20 (Thomas
Linder).
202 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 12:20-12:53 (Thomas
Linder).
203 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 10:35-10:55 (Thomas
Linder).
204 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 10:55-11:25 (Thomas
Linder).
205 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 11:25-11:45 (Thomas
Linder).
206 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 29:00-29:10.
207 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 28:15-28:40
208 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 29:10-29:30.
209 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 44:11-44:44.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
possible.210 Members of the DAA can be all over the world, but
because the Association is a legal entity, it must have a “seed” in
Switzerland, run in Switzerland.211 Individuals wishing to launch a
DAA have low legal costs212 but high technical costs.213
A fully legally-compliant organization living entirely on the
blockchain is possible, but complicated.214 In a technical setting,
everything must be defined, because resolving a code issue is not as
simply resolved as in a legal dispute.215 For example, coders had to
consider whether the General Assembly could be scheduled on-
chain 200 years in the future.216 Another example is that when the
delegate, analogous to a president, of the DAO steps down with no
new delegate in place, the wallet must be blocked so the DAA
cannot actively engage in business activities, e.g. disburse funds.217
Therefore, only the most basic common denominator enabling the
operation of a fully functional Swiss Association, runs entirely on-
chain.218
c) HOPR
Another take on the DAA is the HOPR Association. HOPR is the
first Swiss Association-based model to implement the on-chain
interactions smart contracts, taking “baby steps” towards a full on-
chain DAO.219 HOPR is an operative association governed by a
token.220 HOPR is building a privacy infrastructure that can be used
for blockchains, MedTech applications, among others.221
HOPR implements a new set of smart contracts behind a new
construct, Decentralized Community Enabling Governance,
210 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 35:30-36:22.
211 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 36:22-37:05.
212 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 51:00-51:23.
213 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 50:34-51:00.
214 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 30:21-40.
215 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 27:40-28:15
216 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 27:10-27:40.
217 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 29:40-30:21.
218 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 26:00-26:30.
219 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 34:30-35:23.
220 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 33:10-33:50.
221 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 30:39-30:54.
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

developed by ValidityLabs.222 This framework is called
DecenGov.223 DecenGov utilizes multiple iterations to eventually
achieve full on-chain interaction.224 The first iteration is a “vanilla”
Swiss Association, with all off-chain interactions, that is governed
on-chain by a token.225 The second iteration is quadratic voting.226
The third iteration is to move back on chain, step-by-step.227
The HOPR model has a utility token, which gives those who engage
with that token a stake in having a voting right.228 This kind of token
is not a security but rather a true governance token. Therefore, legal
and compliance hurdles, such as the original DAO had to engage
with, are less likely.229 The token address is comparable to a
membership certificate, which, as such, is not transferrable.230 This
feature is missing from traditional ICO entities where the
decentralized network disconnected from the legal entity that is
opaque and ripe for disruption.231 This was the case with Ethereum
and has generated criticism where a grant proposal mechanism has
not been open or participatory.232 The HOPR structure combines the
governance at the legal entity level, allowing the entity itself to be
governed in an open, participatory fashion.233 Another approach is
to combine a foundation that has assets with an association of nodes,
members, and introduce governance on that level and influence
decisions on the foundation level.234
d) MolochDAO
222 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 20:05-20:21, 31:25-
32:00, 34:30-35:23.
223 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 31:25-32:00.
224 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 31:25-33:50.
225 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 31:25-32:00.
226 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 32:00-32:10. (32:10-
33:10 description of quadratic voting, reference also to Buterik blog on same)
227 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 33:10-33:50.
228 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 44:40-45:07
229 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 47:00-47:17.
230 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 47:17-47:49.
231 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 45:10-45:45.
232 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 45:50-46:22
233 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 45:45-46:22.
234 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 46:22-47:00
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
Moloch DAO is perhaps the most prominent DAO in the early
2020s. MolochDAO was formed to fund and develop public
infrastructure related to Ethereum 2.0. 235 This objective can be
accomplished by incentivizing coordination between Eth 2.0
projects and major ecosystem stakeholders.236 The code is open
source, enabling members to create their own guilds, and the goal
of MolochDAO is to create a hypercompetitive market for Moloch
DAOs.237 MolochDAO (the original Moloch) has been described as
a grant-giving initiative for ETH 2.0, scalability and adoption.238
MolochDAO is simple, entirely on-chain without a legal
wrapper.239 The term “moloch” is a reference to an article about
collective action problems.240 MolochDAO defines public
infrastructure, or the blockchain commons, as “technology where
the total benefit generated by the technology to the community is
greater than the individualized benefit to any particular entity.”241
The initial MolochDAO v1 guild was created on February 14, 2019
when Ameen Soleimani utilized his one vote and manually added a
set of initial founders to the guild by issuing shares for a fixed entry
tribute.242 This process is called “summoning”” and the first
individual and their member address in the constructor is called a
“summoner.”243 MolochDAO has three contracts: Moloch.sol,
GuildBank.sol, and Pool.sol.244
Moloch is intended to be forked, upgraded and iterated on rapidly,
with new on-chain and off-chain mechanisms, driven by guild
235 Matt Slipper & Dan Tsui, The State of Ethereum 2.0; Ethereum 2.0 (2019),
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PS0k9MaKPdPwEw3Uh9rq7USjq7LcSp
T6ICQUXRij4YE/edit, https://consensys.net/knowledge-base/ethereum-2/;
Download the Ethereum 2.0 Staking Ecosystem Report,
https://consensys.net/insights/eth-2-staking-ecosystem-report.
236 MolochDAO, infra note 244, at 1-2.
237 MolochDAO, infra note 244, at 6.
238 Ven Gist, Moloch Primer for Humans, MEDIUM (Oct. 2, 2019)
https://medium.com/odyssy/moloch-primer-for-humans-9e6a4f258f78.
239 MME Switzerland Token Summit, supra note 17, at 33:53-34:15.
240 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 1-2.
241 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 2.
242 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 10; Gist, supra note 238.
243 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 10; Gist, supra note 238.
244 MolochDAO, MolochDAO 101 - Welcome to Moloch (Aug. 2019),
https://molochdao.discourse.group/t/molochdao-101-welcome-to-moloch/24
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

size.245 Beginning in June 2019 with MetaCartel DAO, 119 DAOs
have cloned MolochDAO.246 Participants can clone MolochDAO
using the rage-quit mechanism.247 That is, if participants do not
agree with the result of a vote, they can exit with their funds by
“rage-quitting” the guild within a grace period of seven days after
voting on a proposal completes but before members’ ownership is
affected by the proposal.248 When guild size is small, members
retain voting power and can keep the organization’s philosophy
aligned on a specific goal.249 On the other hand, as guild pool value
increases, the cost to each individual member per proposal
decreases.250
The core mechanism of MolochDAO restructures incentives by
pooling user funds and locking them up in a Guild Bank contract.
This process gives contributors voting rights over how those funds
should be spent, proportional to their contribution relative to the
total pool.251 To ensure votes cannot be bought and sold on the open
market, shares are inalienable.252 Members can liquidate their
votes.253
In order to maximize security, the absolute minimum set of
functionality is on-chain.254 MolochDAO also implements iterative
development methodology.255 When participants deem an upgrade
necessary, they can deploy a new DAO smart contract and exit
Moloch, coordinating off-chain, rather than upgrading on-chain.256
A dilution bound stops a large set of colluding actors from forcing
a minority of guild members to experience massive dilution in a
245 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 6.
246 DAOHAUS, https://daohaus.club/; see also Cooper Turley, Moloch—2019
Year in Review, MEDIUM (Jan. 1, 2020),
https://medium.com/@molochdao/moloch-2019-year-in-review-eb6f53dc035.
247 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 5-6.
248 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 5, 9.
249 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 6.
250 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 6.
251 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 3.
252 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 7.
253 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 3.
254 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 6.
255 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 7.
256 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 7.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
single hit by all rage-quitting at the same time—the maximum
dilution a member can suffer is specified in the contract with a
default of three.257
In order to join the guild, individuals submit a membership
proposal, which requests a certain number of Shares in return for a
tribute in wETH, which is a way to wrap Ether as an ERC-20
token.258 However, only existing members can submit a
membership proposal, and only up to five proposals may be
submitted per day.259 Existing members vote on new entrants in a
similar fashion to funding proposals, as well as whether to grant the
requested number of Shares.260 No quorum requirement exists —
votes are won by simple majority.261 The voting period of each
proposal is seven days, and there is a maximum of thirty five
proposals being voted on at any given time, each staggered by 4.8
hours.262 A seven-day grace period exists for membership proposal
votes.263 If the membership proposal is accepted, the tribute tokens
are deposited into the Guild Bank and new shares are minted and
issued.264 Membership proposals require a 10 ETH deposit, 9.9
ETH is returned regardless of outcome, and 0.1 ETH is reserved.265
MolochDAO v2 contract standard was released in August 2019266
and was designed through a collaborative effort between
MetaCartel, The LAO, and Moloch.267 The MetaCartel Venture
DAO268 is expected to be the first deployment of Moloch v2.269
257 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 9-10.
258 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 7; Gist, supra note 238.
259 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 8.
260 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 4, 7.
261 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 9.
262 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 8-9.
263 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 9.
264 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 7.
265 MolochDAO, supra note 244, at 8.
266 Moloch (@MolochDAO), TWITTER (Aug 28, 2019),
https://twitter.com/MolochDAO/status/1166693888008081410?s=20.
267 Moloch v2, https://github.com/MolochVentures/moloch; The LAO, supra
note 54.
268 Metacartel Ventures (@VENTURE_DAO), TWITTER (Sept. 2019),
https://twitter.com/venture_dao; Metacartel, MCV, GITHUB (2020),
https://github.com/metacartel/MCV/blob/master/MCV-Whitepaper.md.
269 Moloch v2, supra note 267.
50
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

v2—LAO will use a multi-signature-controlled admin role to
complete authorized transactions on Moloch DAO and manage off-
chain operational tasks.270 Molochv2 will also add a more capital-
driven membership onboarding process.271
e) MakerDAO
Maker DAO is clearly the leading DAO project by market
capitalization and overall use in the early 2020s. MakerDAO uses
token mechanisms to create new organizational structures that allow
its members to achieve a common goal.272 The Maker system
creates a decentralized, open scientific risk management
community, which was initially273 guided by the Maker Foundation,
but eventually led by risk teams formally elected by MKR (the
Maker DAO governance token) vote, and contributions of
independent volunteer risk researchers.274
The Maker Protocol allows users to generate Dai by leveraging
collateral assets approved by “Maker Governance,” the community-
organized and operated process of managing the protocol.275 Token
holders have the right to vote on critical changes to the network
chain, which ultimately determines the success of the network.276
These votes on MakerDAO include some of the highest stake votes
in the digital asset industry.277
270 The LAO, supra note 267.
271 The LAO, supra note 267.
272 Nick Tomaino, Lessons from MakerDAO, MEDIUM (Feb. 19, 2018),
https://thecontrol.co/lessons-from-makerdao-a42081116e9a.
273 See MakerDAO, supra note 50 (discussion of The First Risk Construct).
274 MakerDAO, supra note 50; See also MakerDAO Governance Risk
Framework (Part 2), MAKERDAO (July 30, 2018),
https://blog.makerdao.com/makerdao-governance-risk-framework-part-2/, at
“Maker token holder (MTH) and Maker internal risk team (MRT) duties”.
275 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49.
276 Tomaino, supra note 272.
277 Ben DiFrancesco, FakerDAO: An Exploration of MakerDAO’s Governance
Incentives, SCOPELIFT: HIGH CALIBER CRYPTO (Mar. 9, 2020),
https://www.scopelift.co/blog/fakerdao.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
Eventually, Maker token holders will manage the risk function of
the system through the two-part voting mechanism.278 Proactive
governance includes debate, resolution, and automated
implementation.279 Reactive governance contains procedural
intervention.280 Risk teams will contribute “risk constructs”—
assessments and risk parameters for the system.281 The governance
debate will be about choosing risk teams based on their proposed
risk constructs, and risk teams will be elected through a vote.282
The self-sustaining MakerDAO has technical, human, and
procedural elements to enable the community to maintain a fully
decentralized Maker Protocol and be completely responsible for
every aspect of the MakerDAO.283 Some community members will
form a decentralized workforce, Elected Paid Contributors (EPC),
elected by Maker governance.284 A subset of the EPCs will manage
critical processes.285 Community members can define key issues
and suggest system modifications through Maker Improvement
Proposals (MIPs).286 All token holders will have an active stake in
the ecosystem, can pool their voting power through Vote
Delegates.287
The Dai stablecoin is collateralized, which asks users to put trust in
token value on-chain rather than off-chain.288 Dai is supplied to the
blockchain through a lending system, Maker’s smart contract
Collateralized Debt Position, which provides loans and attempts to
mitigate risk.289 In case the system debt exceeds the surplus, the
278 MakerDAO, Governance Risk Framework Part 1, supra note 50.
279 MakerDAO, Governance Risk Framework Part 1, supra note 50.
280 MakerDAO, Governance Risk Framework Part 1, supra note 50.
281 MakerDAO, Governance Risk Framework Part 1, supra note 50.
282 MakerDAO, Governance Risk Framework Part 1, supra note 50.
283 MakerDAO, What Will Maker Governance Look Like After Complete
Decentralization?, MAKERDAO: BLOG (Apr. 3, 2020)
https://blog.makerdao.com/what-will-maker-governance-look-like-after-
complete-decentralization/.
284 MakerDAO, supra note 283.
285 MakerDAO, supra note 283.
286 MakerDAO, supra note 283.
287 MakerDAO, supra note 283.
288 MakerDAO, supra note 50.
289 MakerDAO, supra note 50.
52
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

tokens are the recapitalization resource of the protocol.290 Dai is a
collateral-backed cryptocurrency soft-pegged to the US Dollar and
resistant to hyperinflation due to low volatility.291 Maker released a
new multi collateral Dai (MCD), which brought with it some new
features but did not change Maker governance.292
Anyone, not only token holders, can submit proposals for a vote by
deploying a proposal contract.293 A proposal contract—a smart
contract with one or more valid governance actions programmed
into it—can be deployed by any Ethereum address, and once
executed, immediately applies its changes to the internal
governance variables of the protocol.294 Once a proposal contract is
deployed, token holders cast approval votes for the proposal they
want to elect as the Active Proposal.295 The Ethereum address with
the highest number of approval votes is elected as the Active
Proposal, which is then empowered to gain administrative access to
the internal governance variables of the protocol and then modify
them.296 The contract can only be executed once and cannot be
reused after execution.297
The MakerDAO governance system298 is scientific and evolved.299
It requires first governance poling/proposal polling/governance
290 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 14.
291 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49.
292 See MakerDAO, Currency Re-imagined for the World: Multi-Collateral Dai
is Live!, MAKERDAO: BLOG (Nov. 18, 2019), https://blog.makerdao.com/multi-
collateral-dai-is-live/.
293 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49 at 13.
294 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 13.
295 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 13-14.
296 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 14.
297 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 13.
298 See See MakerDAO, Awesome-Makerdao, GITHUB (2020),
https://github.com/makerdao/awesome-
makerdao/blob/master/README.md#governance-and-risk;
MakerDAO, MakerDAO Governance Risk Framework (Part 3), (Dec. 11,
2018), https://blog.makerdao.com/makerdao-governance-risk-framework-part-
3, (for more information on MakerDAO governance.)
299 MakerDAO, supra note 50; see also MAKER FOUNDATION, Scientific
Governance and Risk, YOUTUBE (Jun. 25, 2020),
https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLLzkWCj8ywWNq5-90-
Id6VPSsrk4OWVan.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
vote and only thereafter executive voting.300 The governance
system is designed to be flexible and upgradeable.301 The
governance token of the protocol, MKR, allows token holders to
vote on changes to the protocol.302 Voting power is proportional to
the outstanding supply of tokens.303 First, proposal polling
establishes a rough consensus of community sentiment before any
executive votes are cast.304 Next, executive voting is held, for
example on a vote to ratify risk parameters for a newly accepted
collateral type.305 A governance security module is in place that
gives token holders the opportunity to protect the system against a
malicious governance proposal by creating a delay of up to 24 hours
before the protocol modification takes effect, and permitting
members to trigger a shutdown, if necessary.306
In late March 2020, Maker formally transferred token control to the
community.307 The first governance cycle308 took place in May
300 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 2, 5, 13; see also
MakerDAO, supra note 50.
301 For a full list of token holder responsibilities and modifications token holders
can vote on, see MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 14.
302 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 13. See also MakerDAO,
What is MKR?, MEDIUM (Sep. 10, 2015),
https://medium.com/@MakerDAO/what-is-mkr-e6915d5ca1b3.
303 Maker Foundation, Maker Protocol 101 Slide Deck, (Dec. 9, 2019),
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1bEOlNk2xUXgwy0I_UlB_8tPPZ8mH1gy9/vie
w slide 36. For more on Maker governance, see
https://docs.makerdao.com/smart-contract-modules/governance-module.
304 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 13.
305 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 13.
306 MakerDAO, Maker Whitepaper, supra note 49, at 13.
307 MakerDAO, The Transfer of MKR Token Control to Governance: The Final
Step, MAKERDAO: BLOG (Mar. 25, 2020) https://blog.makerdao.com/the-
transfer-of-mkr-token-control-to-governance-the-final-step/; see also Charles
St.Louis, Announcement: Kickstarting the Self-Sustaining MakerDAO Initiative,
MAKERDAO: BLOG (Apr. 1, 2020)
https://forum.makerdao.com/t/announcement-kickstarting-the-self-sustaining-
makerdao-initiative/1864 (“Announcement (Apr. 1, 2020)”).
308 See MAKERDAO, MIP3: Governance Cycle, GITHUB (May 2, 2020),
https://github.com/makerdao/mips/blob/master/MIP3/mip3.md#mip3c2-
governance-cycle-breakdown.
54
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

2020309 on Maker’s first thirteen MIPs310 introduced in April 2020
on preferred mechanisms for improving governance and
protocol.311 After several years of proposal and governance
iterations, this framework is to lead to fully autonomous community
governance of the Maker Protocol, followed by dissolution of the
Maker Foundation.312 The second governance cycle began June 1,
2020.313
f) DevDAO
The DevDAO’s approach combines technological, governance, and
legal solutions in an effort to accomplish a higher degree of
decentralization in the architecture.
The DevDAO internal governance design and its external legal
design supplement each other on many levels and create synergies.
For many attempts to create legal solutions, if the internal voting
mechanism of a DAO is more centralized and afflicted with existing
legacy voting issues, a higher degree of decentralization in the
external legal design will typically be cancelled out in the long run.
If the degrees of internal and external governance decentralization
cancel each other out, the respective DAO is less likely to succeed
in its decentralization attempt, which in turn makes it more likely
for the DAO to fail. By contrast, the DevDAO’s synergy between
internal DAO governance and external legal DAO designs can
accomplish higher levels of decentralization. Because the internal
governance of the DevDAO is decentralized and effective through
309 MakerDAO, Maker Governance Review: May 2020, MAKERDAO: BLOG
(Jun. 3, 2020), https://blog.makerdao.com/maker-governance-review-may-
2020/.
310 Charles St. Louis, The Release of the 13 Initial Maker Improvement
Proposals (MIPs), MAKERDAO FORUM, (Apr. 6, 2020),
https://forum.makerdao.com/t/the-release-of-the-13-initial-maker-improvement-
proposals-mips/1915; see also MakerDAO, The First 13 Maker Improvement
Proposals (MIPs) To Further Decentralization of MakerDAO, MAKERDAO:
BLOG (Apr. 6, 2020), https://blog.makerdao.com/the-first-13-maker-
improvement-proposals-to-further-decentralization-of-makerdao/.
311 St. Louis, supra note 307.
312 St. Louis, supra note 307.
313 MakerDAO, supra note 309.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
reputation staking, it is more likely to create internal governance
solutions that translates well into real-word legal solutions.
The DevDAO governance design helps to facilitate a more equal
distribution of power. Language, religion, race, physical presence,
group identifiers, culture, etc., influence centralized power
distribution. Similarly, commonly used identifiers in centralized
governance such as social media profiles and credit scores, among
others, are essential for access to the central system and to
resources. Such relatively superficial identifiers play less of a role
in the DevDAO voting designs. The more equal distribution of
power in the DevDAO governance design allows the inclusion of
constituents who otherwise have no agency in centralized systems.
- Legal Structure
Key for the legal solution offered by the DevDAO is its duality of
internal and external governance design that helps optimize the
decentralized nature of the DevDAO. The internal and external
governance coordination is facilitated by the duality of entities and
their respective governance. For the internal governance, the
DevDAO uses a system of reputation token staking that facilitates
unprecedented incentivization of the DevDAO community and
governance improvements in orders of magnitude. For the external
legal relationships and governance, the DevDAO is represented in
real-world legal contexts by the Emerging Technology Association
(ETA) under Swiss law.
The objective of the ETA is to establish a decentralized and
democratic association with flat hierarchies. The ETA accomplishes
this objective by supporting open source and transparent research
and development of emerging technologies and frameworks for
community building and governance by way of receiving grants
from unaffiliated entities and issuing grants to a broad array of
experts, developers, and scientists around the globe.
Key for the success of the duality of internal and external
governance of the DevDAO is the broad deference the ETA gives
to the voting outcomes that originate in the DevDAO. This
deference is accomplished through delegation of voting power and
56
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

outcomes from the DevDAO to a member of the ETA, called the
Delegate Association Member (DAM). Under the ETA articles, the
DAM merely executes the upvotes on a given issue coming out of
the DevDAO. The majority of the voting rights can also convene
an extraordinary Association Assembly at any time. To create
maximum deference to the votes within the DevDAO, under the
ETA articles, the ETA Board has only those competencies that
actually require the action of an individual, natural person. Such
duties include representation of the DevDAO and the ETA and the
duty to keep records, among others. In other words, the ETA Board
merely executes the decisions of the DevDAO. In the ETA
assembly, the DAM always has more votes, representing the
upvotes on a given decision coming out of the DevDAO, than the
ETA board because only five initial board members have voting
rights. Through the votes executed in the DevDAO and represented
in the ETA assembly, the DevDAO determines the support of
developers and scientists and the funding allocation for projects the
DevDAO sponsors.
Figure 1: Legal Structure of DevDAO and Emerging Technology
Association (Swiss Law)
Figure 1 illustrates that the ETA is subject to the governance and
voting outcomes of all the DAOs that operate within the ETA’s
legal framework. The DevDAO is the first and primary DAO in the
ETA infrastructure. Like the DevDAO, all DAOs in the ETA
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
exercise their voting power through the ETA’s DAM under the ETA
Articles. The DevDAO established the minimum viable protocol
requirements (“MVPR”) which apply to any and all DAOs that
operate under the Association’s legal framework. The MVPR
establish a system of reputation staking for the internal governance
of the DevDAO. After adopting the MVPR (adopting entirely or
hard forking the MVPR code), each DAO in the ETA structure
votes independently through a DAM in the ETA who represents the
total upvotes from each DAO in the ETA general assembly.
This combination of factors in the DevDAO enables higher levels
of decentralization. Because the internal governance of the
DevDAO is decentralized and effective through reputation staking,
it can create internal governance solutions that translate well into
real-word legal solutions that are instantiated via the ETA and vice
versa. Because the internal reputation staking voting mechanism of
the DevDAO is more decentralized it creates decentralization
synergies with the external legal design in the ETA. Unlike other
DAO legal proposals, the degrees of internal and external
governance decentralization in the DevDAO and the ETA do not
cancel each other out but rather synergize and enhance each other.
While the ETA is still a form of centralization of the DevDAO, the
DevDAO has the potential to remove the ETA structure
incrementally. The DevDAO may, for instance, replace the DAM
in the ETA, a core point of centralization, with a smart contract. The
automation of the DAM is a key objective of the DevDAO to
continually enhance its decentralization.
- Benefits of DevDAO’s Reputation-Based Internal
Governance
The use of reputation staking and voting metrics in the DevDAO’s
internal governance design has key advantages over other
decentralized voting mechanisms. The DevDAO’s use of reputation
voting has two key advantages over other decentralized one-token-
one-vote voting mechanisms: 1) it is non-fungible which avoids
corruptive elements, and 2) it optimally aligns incentives for
DevDAO members individually and at the same time aligns their
incentives for the totality of the DevDAO as an institution. Because
reputation is non-fungible, and ideally anonymous, it is much
harder for DevDAO members and external participants to try to
58
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

game the system to improve their own utility exclusively while
hurting the common good of the DAO.
The DevDAO’ non-fungible and fungible token governance design
enables the incentivization of DevDAO members with indirect
economic gain. In the DevDAO’s bifurcated design with two
disparate types of tokens, e.g. reputation tokens and reputation
salary tokens, 1. the non-fungible reputation tokens give DevDAO
members voting rights, and 2. fungible reputation salary tokens
allow DevDAO members to earn a fungible salary in proportion to
their non-fungible reputation tokens. DevDAO members increase
their non-fungible tokens by making valuable contributions to the
DAO and participating consistently in DevDAO voting pools.
DevDAO members get paid with a fungible stable token
denominated in US Dollars that is pegged to a pool of fungible
tokens. The salary payments in fungible stable tokens are in
proportion to DevDAO members’ respective non-fungible
reputation token scores. The indirect economic effects remove
corruptive elements and make the governance design more attack
resistant and stable in the long run.
Reputation as a valuation metric allows DevDAO members to
improve their own utility while at the same time improving the
DevDAO in the long term. Because reputation is used as a metric
for indirect economic benefits, e.g. a salary in fungible tokens that
is paid in proportion of the non-fungible reputation token score,
DevDAO reputation token holders are incentivized to increase their
own reputation/utility by engaging in valuable conduct for the
DAO. The more the aggregated individual reputation of all
DevDAO members increases the more the overall DevDAO value
increases and the more the DevDAO creates value enhancing
outcomes for its members.
Reputation-staking as a basis for the DevDAO governance
improves incentive alignment. Reputation-staking as a basis for
DevDAO governance enables the correlation between individual
and institutional value enhancement. DevDAO members rationally
stake their own reputation tokens based on the outcomes they
believe will increase their overall reputation/utility. If they did not,
they would irrationally sacrifice a future income stream in fungible
tokens. Through reputation-staking, the DevDAO members are
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
incentivized to provide long-term positive contributions because the
DevDAO member reputation is transparent and reviewable by the
DevDAO and the public in a slow and stable review process that
reaches far into the future. Valuable individual behavior/work that
leads to individualized reputation staking and individual reputation
enhancement also enhances the DevDAO as an institution because
the individual and institutional value enhancement are correlated.
The correlation between individual DevDAO value enhancement
and DevDAO institutional value enhancement can be illustrated as
follows. Take for example, a DevDAO member who stakes that a
given smart contract template is optimal for XYZ
outcome/application. Once the template is affirmed by the
DevDAO members as optimal at that point in time, it becomes a
valuable precedent for the DevDAO members and external DAOs.
Hence, the staking of an individual and the ex-ante work that leads
to staking increases sustainable value for all DevDAO members.
The DevDAO members and other DAOs will rationally
increasingly use the precedent until a better precedent emerges.
That precedent thus increases the individual DAO member’s
reputation and the DAO overall.
The reputation-based governance design in the DevDAO changes
the dynamic of a zero-sum game to a positive-sum game. Prior
DAO governance designs were mostly zero-sum games as they used
mostly fungible rewards and incentive designs. Accordingly, in
prior DAO designs, DAO members pursued as large of a portion of
the rewards as possible for themselves. By contrast, the reputation-
based DevDAO governance design creates a positive-sum game
because DevDAO members have incentives to create lasting non-
fungible value for the DevDAO by developing a long-term non-
fungible record of productive cooperation that in effect improves
the DevDAO. Moreover, individual DevDAO member reputation
can change dynamically if the DevDAO member actions depreciate
in value. The DevDAO member reputation is inflationary in the
DevDAO design. As such, non-use, e.g. non-staking of reputation
tokens or non-voting, would lead to value depreciation, which
incentivizes action and thus value enhancement. Liveness faults
become less likely. Its ability to address liveness faults in its
incentive design is a key distinguishing feature of the DevDAO.
60
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

The DevDAO’s decentralized on-chain precedent system enables
dynamic and evolutionary reputation-based governance. Most prior
attempts at DAO governance design had no dynamic and
evolutionary elements. By contrast, the DevDAO’s decentralized
on-chain precedent system enables feedback effects between
DevDAO members, the public record of work/posts on the
blockchain, and the public users. The DevDAO’s decentralized
precedent system makes the continuous upgrading of real-time data
possible. As a post/template on the blockchain gets increasingly
referenced by the DevDAO members and other users, it increases
the respective DevDAO member’s non-fungible reputation weight
and associated fungible token salary. Conversely, if a DevDAO
member’s post/template on the blockchain dissipates over time, a
new post/template emerges naturally. If the new post/template gets
more often referenced by the DevDAO members and other users, it
becomes over time the new prevailing precedent. The old precedent
dissipates over time with non-use. This precedent replacement
mechanism in the DevDAO design is dynamic and evolutionary. It
has the promise to create eternal solutions for DAO governance and
dynamic evolutionary protocol upgrades.
To create the proper incentive design in its reputation staking
engine, the DevDAO incorporates several game theoretical insights:
- The DevDAO disincentivize betrayal and defection by
charging an admission fee to become a DevDAO member.
Given the sunk cost of joining the DevDAO, it is more
expensive for prospective members to cheat because it
would be expensive to rejoin even if members could be
anonymous. The DevDAO also blacklists member accounts
to incentivize cooperation. KYC protocols further expand
those incentives to cooperate.
- To ensure continuous cooperation of DevDAO
members, the promise of future profits in the DevDAO
reputation token outweigh their present value. The DevDAO
reputation token has a more stable and predictable value as
the ETA onboards additional grants and the DevDAO
network grows globally. Reputation tokens in the DevDAO
system are correlated with expected future salary tokens in
the ETA.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
- In the DevDAO design the loss of opportunity from
slashing DevDAO member reputation grows as the size of
the network increases. In other words, the larger the
DevDAO network the more competition for reputation
tokens to receive fungible token salaries. Further, given the
incomplete information due to increasing anonymity, the
value of the information from reputation tokens increases.
When potential business partners have less knowledge of
DevDAO members’ identity, the knowledge from the
number of reputation tokens a DevDAO member holds
becomes more important. Moreover, the lack of personal
knowledge encourages the DevDAO members to devote
more effort to fairly policing reputation tokens. Meritocracy
is encouraged.
The DevDAO reputation staking design also enhances policing and
compliance. The value of DevDAO member reputation is directly
related to how well punishment can be distributed in response to
cheating. The more transparent the system, the more accurate and
efficient policing can be. Members of a traditional business police
cheaters by withholding their business. But to make the threat
credible, members need to police the other members and punish
them if they did business with cheaters. To make the threats credible
in a traditional business setting one would need to monitor those
who, in turn, did not monitor those who, in turn, did not monitor.
This is an expensive proposition. By contrast, in the DevDAO,
algorithms can be written which exclude DevDAO members who
cheat from having access to their market. Punishment for cheating
becomes automated and therefore credible. Free riding in policing
can at least partially be eliminated by automation. Algorithms can
be written proactively to only supply contracts to those who have
sufficient reputation. If a DevDAO member’s reputation is slashed,
such member will not be chosen by the algorithm.
The DevDAO’s reputation-based governance design enables a
much more equal distribution of power. Language, religion, race,
physical presence, group identifiers, culture, etc., influence
centralized power distribution. Similarly, commonly used
identifiers in centralized governance such as social media profiles
and credit scores, among others, are essential for access to the
62
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

central system and to resources. Such relatively superficial
identifiers play less of a role in the DevDAO voting designs. The
more equal distribution of power in the DevDAO governance
design allows the inclusion of constituents who otherwise have no
agency in centralized systems.
- Attack Resistance
The DevDAO design addresses sock-puppet accounts and Sybil
attacks. It is reasonable to assume that DevDAO members can join
from any jurisdiction and cannot be tracked or punished for any bad
behavior by appealing to outside authorities. In that case, the only
punishment available is to take away DevDAO members’ potential
future reputation token salaries in the DevDAO. DevDAO
Members are all anonymous and DevDAO members might try to
game the system by creating multiple accounts, e.g. sock-puppet
accounts. The only way to discourage such malicious actors from
joining is to charge money during the member onboarding process.
Moreover, sock-puppet attacks are also avoided via the DevDAO’s
periodic reputation-weighted salary that distributes all fees the
DevDAO earns through the ETA to all members. Individuals who
bring successful ideas to the DevDAO or perform tasks that bring
fees to the ETA will be rewarded with reputation tokens, not the
salary tokens. DevDAO members who own more reputation tokens
share in a larger percentage of the salary pool. This solves the sock-
puppet attack because if a DevDAO member creates 10 accounts
with 1 reputation token each, it is the same as 1 account with 10
reputation tokens.
The DevDAO design addresses DoS attacks. Denial of Service
(DoS) attacks happen when anonymous adversaries flood a given
network with automated requests for superfluous tasks. Such
incoming superfluous tasks prevent the network from engaging in
productive work. To restrict a significant number of bad actors from
entering the DevDAO system and ensure resistance to basic DoS
attacks, the DevDAO charges a nominal fee during the onboarding
process. This fee merely needs to be high enough so that the effort
to police the bad actors is profitable, but not so high that it prevents
people of good will from joining the DevDAO. The precise number
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
for the onboarding fee depends on the market environment.
Automation should make this feasible.
- Level of Decentralization
The level of decentralization in a DAO design is an indicator for
longevity of the respective DAO. The level of decentralization and
the associated attack resistance and incorruptibility of DAO
governance designs are among the core factors that influence DAO
design adoption, its precedence, and longevity. In other words, the
more decentralized a given DAO design, the more likely that design
will in the long run be adopted by other DAOs. However, not all
future DAO designs will comply with the ideal typical DAO
parameters. Ideal typical DAO design parameters will naturally
filter out at the edges. In other words, because the optimal DAO
design parameters change constantly, if and when formerly ideal
typical designs fail, new and optimized designs will replace them.
The level of decentralization in the DevDAO design reached
unprecedented levels through its applicable design parameters:
- merit identifiers, e.g. DevDAO members merit, knowledge,
and influence is measured through their respective
DevDAO non-fungible reputation token ownership;
- non-fungibility of DevDAO reputation tokens; e.g. merit of
a DevDAO member is expressed by a non-fungible
reputation token that cannot be bought or sold;
- full transparency, e.g. all DevDAO decisions are fully
transparent and accessible by the public and the DevDAO
members themselves;
- indirect economic incentives, e.g. DevDAO members are
getting paid with stable fungible tokens in proportion to
their non-fungible reputation tokens;
- decisions in the DevDAO are made with a voting design
that revolves around staking of non-fungible reputation
tokens; and
- DevDAO’s fungible salary tokens are designed as stable
and $USD denominated cryptocurrencies that maintain
their value at around $1US. The incoming token grants
from a diverse set of grantors are part of the pool of digital
assets that constitute the basket of digital assets against
64
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

which the DevDAO’s stable and $USD denominated
cryptocurrency is pegged.
- anonymity of DevDAO members, e.g. after an initial setup
and development period with less anonymity, DevDAO
merit identifiers revolve around reputation scores and
members of the DevDAO community can predominantly
be identified by their respective reputation score in the
DevDAO structure.
V. Conclusion
The decentralized autonomous corporation was first introduced
briefly in a 2013 blog post. The 2014 Ethereum launch
revolutionarily connected issuers to users through smart contracts
upon which DAOs function today. The 2016 DAO demonstrated
the possibility of using decentralized organizations to pool a large
amount of assets between a large number of people. Since then,
developers and thinkers have attempted to solve not only the
technical flaws of the original DAO had, but also the need to
synchronize the legal aspect of a DAO with its technical aspects.
This article introduced the reader to the benefits of operating a
DAO, its legal limitations, and actual projects undertaking efforts
to operate a DAO on-chain with a corresponding off-chain legally-
recognized entity. DAOs solve the principal-agent problem that
traditional organizations face by reducing misconduct and error,
realigning participant incentives, and ultimately shifting economic
and power dynamics.
Without a legal wrapper, DAOs face potential regulatory
enforcement actions and civil liability, not only at the organization
level but against individual participants. Issues of public policy,
market, economic, and technical limitations also can arise. In order
to create legal certainty, DAOs are evolving using a legal wrapper
of the U.S. limited liability corporation concept and the Swiss civil
law Association. The current third generation of DAOs take a legal
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
entity that exists off-chain and adds a DAO concept, on-chain
governance, to that existing construct. Future DAO generations will
further improve the duality of internal governance and external
legal design. Perhaps it will be possible to free DAO concepts of
legal constraints in the more distant future.
66
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
68
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

DAO LEGAL CONCEPTS
70
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3652481

