Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
HEDGE FUND VALUATION: RETAILIZATION,
REGULATION, AND INVESTOR SUITABILITY
WULF A. KAAL 1
I. Introduction
Valuation issues could become the next "black eye" for the
hedge fund industry.2 The credit crunch and the global financial
crisis have underscored that the valuation of complex financial
products and hard-to-value assets is one of the most pressing issues
affecting confidence in the financial industry today.3 Pricing and
valuation errors do happen despite efforts to ensure fair pricing at all
times.4 As discussed below, hedge funds cannot always ensure
accurate valuation.5 This potential for inaccuracy can result in
1 Assistant Professor, Mississippi College School of Law. Ph.D., Humboldt
Universitaet zu Berlin; J.D., University of Illinois College of Law; M.B.A.,
Finance, Durham University. The author would like to thank David S.
Ruder and Richard W. Painter for their invaluable comments and Nadia M.
Gaya for her research assistance.
2 Stuart Feffer & Christopher Kundro, Valuation Issues and Operational
Risks in Hedge Funds, 10 CAPCO INST. J. FIN. TRANSFORMATION: FOCUS
ON ALTERNATIVE INV. 41, 41 (2003); see also The Hedge Fund Industry:
Hearing Before the Subcomm. on Securities and Investment of the S. Comm.
on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, 109th Cong. (2006) (testimony of
James Chanos, Chairman, Coalition of Private Investment Companies).
3 See generally HEDGE FUND WORKING GROUP, HEDGE FUND STANDARDS:
FINAL REPORT (2008), http://www.pellin.co.uk/HFWG/HFWG-FINAL-
REPORT.pdf [hereinafter HFWG] (noting that the issue does not only affect
hedge funds but the financial industry at large and is just as pressing for
investment banks, proprietary trading desks, commercial banks and money
market funds).
4 See generally TECH. COMM. OF THE INT'L. ORG. OF SEC. COMM'NS,
REGULATORY APPROACHES TO THE VALUATION AND PRICING OF
COLLECTIVE INV SCHEMES (1999), http://www.iosco.org/library/
pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD91.pdf [hereinafter REGULATORY APPROACHES]
(describing reasons for errors in asset valuation).
5 See generally TECH. COMM. OF THE INT'L. ORG. OF SEC. COMM'NS,
PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS (2007),
http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD240.pdf [hereinafter
PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS] (outlining
principals of hedge fund valuation and challenged that arise in valuing
complex financial instruments).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1428387

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
catastrophic scenarios for managers and investors. In 2002, for
example, Lipper & Co. liquidated three of its hedge funds after a
$315 million write-down related to the incorrect valuation of illiquid
securities.6 Hedge fund valuation issues are alleged to have
significantly contributed to the collapse of Beacon Hill Asset
Management and others.7
The variety of hedge fund investments and strategies does
not allow for a uniform approach to valuation because some types of
investments, such as non-concentrated positions in liquid securities,
are easier to value than other investments. To the extent that recent
transaction prices as well as marketable bids and offers are not
readily available and cannot be checked on major wires and feeds,
broker quotes must be sought to determine what the position is
worth.8 In addition, broker quotes may be difficult to obtain and can
be quite unreliable—mortgage-backed securities, for example, can
sometimes vary by 20 to 30 percent—making accurate valuation of
these securities difficult. The potential for inaccuracy is exacerbated
by highly complex securities that can only be accurately valued by
use of highly complex mathematical models.
International bodies have tried to address the issue, primarily
focusing on the valuation of complex futures, options, structured
credits and over-the-counter derivatives.9 As a result of political
pressures on hedge funds to ensure that valuation methodologies are
consistently and reasonably applied, interest groups, international
bodies, and regulators have made various proposals and issued
guidelines.10 However, these proposals and guidelines mostly address
6 Allison Bisbey Colter, Several Kenneth Lipper Hedge Funds are Being
Liquidated After Big Losses, WALL ST. J., Mar. 29, 2002, at C11.
7 Feffer & Kundro, supra note 2, at 42-43.
8 Id. at 43.
9 See PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS, supra
note 5; TECH. COMM. OF THE INT'L. ORG. OF SEC. COMM'NS, THE
REGULATORY ENV’T FOR HEDGE FUNDS A SURVEY AND COMPARISON
(2006), http://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD226.pdf [here-
inafter THE REGULATORY ENV’T FOR HEDGE FUNDS].
10 See CHARTERED FIN. ANALYST INST., CENTRE FOR FIN. MARKET
INTEGRITY, ASSET MANAGER CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT (2005),
http://www.cfapubs.org/doi/pdf/10.2469/ccb.v2004.n4.4008; FIN. STABIL-
ITY FORUM, REPORT OF THE WORKING GROUP ON HIGHLY LEVERAGED
INSTITUTIONS 66 (2000), http://www.fsforum.org/publications/r_0004
a.pdf?noframes=1 [hereinafter FIN. STABILITY FORUM REPORT]; INT'L ASSN.
OF FIN. ENGINEERS, INVESTOR RISK COMM., VALUATION CONCEPTS FOR
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877
Electronic copy available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1428387

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
issues relating to complex financial instruments and do not take into
account that a uniform approach to the issue of valuation presents
many challenges. They also do not adequately distinguish between
retail investors and qualified investors.11 So far, no legislature has
issued an exhaustive set of rules to address the factors that lead to
inaccurate valuation.
This paper analyzes the factors that contribute to the
valuation problem, followed by a summary of existing proposals and
rules as they pertain to valuation of hedge funds to lead into a
discussion of the phenomenon of “retailization” and how it is
recognized and addressed by regulators in various jurisdictions. The
paper then details some of the reasons for a different treatment of
retail and qualified investors. The paper concludes with a description
of theoretical regulatory options to address the differences as well as
potential problems with such options and analyzes alternatives.
II. The Valuation Problem
Valuation may be defined as the process of determining the
value of a hedge fund portfolio at a given time.12 An inherent
INVESTMENT COMPANIES AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND THEIR
STAKEHOLDERS (2004), http://www.iafe.org/upload/IAFEValuationCon
cepts.pdf [hereinafter VALUATION CONCEPTS FOR INVESTMENT
COMPANIES]; INT'L SWAPS AND DERIVATIVES ASSN., INC., ISDA 1999
COLLATERAL REVIEW (1999), http://www.isda.org/press/ pdf/colrev99.pdf;
PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS, supra note
5; REGULATORY APPROACHES, supra note 4.
11 For purposes of this paper, the term “qualified investor” is not used in
accordance with the technical definition of Securities Exchange Act of
1934, 15 U.S.C. § 78(c) (2000) or any other laws, but shall mean any
investor who would be considered a qualified or accredited investor under
any of the existing rules and regulations of U.S. law. “Retail investor,” for
purposes of this paper, shall mean any investor who would currently not be
considered an accredited or qualified investor under any of the existing rules
and regulations of U.S. law. See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. § 77b(a)(15) (2000)
(defining “accredited investor” for purposes of the Securities Act of 1933);
15 U.S.C. § 80a-3(c)(7) (2000) (defining “qualified purchaser” for purposes
of the Investment Company Act of 1940); 17 C.F.R. § 230.144A (2008)
(defining “qualified institutional buyer" for purposes of Rule 144A); 17
C.F.R. § 230.501(a) (2008) (defining “accredited investor” for purposes of
Regulation D under the Securities Act of 1933).
12 HFWG, supra note 3, at 21.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
problem with valuation is the attempt to provide a single number to
determine what an illiquid or derivative asset is worth, what it might
be sold for and over what period. Peer pressure and intense
competition among hedge funds to attract investors make accurate
valuation of hedge funds a vital issue. With the lack of regulatory
oversight in most jurisdictions, as well as the general lack of self-
discipline and internal controls, valuation is very likely to become
the next major issue for the hedge fund industry.13
Addressing the valuation problem appropriately and with the
least regulatory costs and least impact on the industry will require
identifying the reasons for under- and/or over-valuation of hedge
funds. These include (i) convergence of hedge funds and private
equity funds, (ii) the fee structure of hedge funds (iii) potential
conflicts of interest of hedge fund managers who manage and value
their portfolios, (iv) valuation of complex futures, options, structured
credits and over-the-counter derivatives, and (v) transparency.
A. Convergence of Hedge Funds and Private Equity
Funds
The need to stay competitive and attract institutional
investors requires private equity funds and hedge funds to diversify
and merge different aspects of alternate asset management.14
Accordingly, over the last several years, private equity funds and
hedge funds have been acquiring stakes in each other. Merging both
asset classes allows private equity funds and hedge funds to offer a
broader variety of funds to their investors and to combine the new
asset classes with cost advantages of increasing scale.15 Blackstone
Group and other alternative asset managers manage a multitude of
entities such as private equity funds, hedge funds, as well as funds of
hedge funds and various closed end mutual funds and debt-based
funds.16
A private equity firm’s performance tends to improve with
age.17 Accordingly, hedge funds employing investment strategies
13 Feffer & Kundro, supra note 2.
14 IBISWORLD, U.S. INDUS. REPORT: PRIVATE EQUITY, HEDGE FUNDS &
INV. VEHICLES 39 (May 30, 2008), [hereinafter IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY
REPORT].
15 Id.
16 Id.
17 See Steven N. Kaplan & Antoinette Schoar, Private Equity Performance:
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
akin to private equity firms may statistically be most at risk for
underperformance. This possibility, in turn, may create incentives to
correct performance data by way of valuation. Valuation problems
could be further exacerbated by the business strategies and model of
private equity funds. The core business model of private equity
funds, with variations, is to invest private funds from individuals,
institutional investors, and endowments into companies directly. In a
trend cresting in early 2008, some funds would purchase the
outstanding stock of publicly traded companies, thereby taking them
private. This limited disclosure about the new portfolio companies in
two ways. First, the newly privatized companies were no longer
subject to the 1934 Act disclosures. Second, the public markets no
longer ‘valued’ the companies via trading.
In reporting the fair value of their holdings, companies are
required by U.S. accounting authorities to distinguish between assets
with market-based valuations and those valued internally by the
company using “unobservable inputs.”18 Private companies are
harder to value than publicly traded companies because of the
absence of periodic disclosure and because of the absence of market-
check. Moreover, private equity firms hold their companies until a
realization event that may come years in the future. With such a
long-term strategy, the value of a private equity firm’s portfolio is
less important to that firm at any single moment in time than it would
be to a hedge fund limited partner. If hedge funds engage in private
equity strategies, i.e. adding private companies to their portfolio, they
may exacerbate the valuation issues. The convergence of hedge funds
and private-equity funds makes it more difficult to accurately assess
the value of each asset class.
As long as private equity funds and hedge funds are treated
as separate asset classes with no significant convergence, most
Returns, Persistence and Capital Flows, 60 J. FIN. 1595, 1791-1823 (2005)
(describing a study on the performance of private equity firms over a thirty-
year period, finding a wide discrepancy in the performance of private equity
firms over such thirty-year period, and concluding that new private equity
funds were at risk for the greatest underperformance).
18 FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS, Statement of Fin. Accounting Standards
No. 157 ¶¶ 22-30 (Fin. Accounting Standards Bd. 2006) [hereinafter FASB
157], available at www.fasb.org/st/, www.fasb.org/pdf/fas157.pdf; see also
Richard Beales & Gillian Tett, Real Risks Emerge When Pandora's
Investment Box is Opened, FIN. TIMES, June 29, 2007, available at
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d42b071a-25bd-11dc-b338-000b5df10621.html.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
practitioners deal with valuation issues in an asset class specific
manner. For private equity funds, practitioners address the valuation
issue with a variety of measures including reference to the original
purchase price and fair market valuation involving independent
appraisers. For hedge funds, practitioners often require valuation of
securities and over-the-counter products at the average of the last
“trade” price on each trading day during the ten trading day periods
ending immediately prior to the time of determination, or if no sales
occurred on any such day, the mean between the closing “bid” and
“ask” prices on such day. Other securities are often valued by the
general partner of a hedge fund at fair market value in such a manner
as the general partner may determine. These measures for hedge fund
and private equity fund valuation, at best, provide a best-effort
valuation.
In the context of convergence of hedge funds and private
equity funds, valuation issues necessitate a rethinking of existing
valuation methods. Hedge funds, for example, often set aside private
equity investments in so-called “side pockets.” Side pockets are
separate accounts that do not require regular valuations and are
excluded from calculation of performance fees. This practice allows
hedge funds to treat such an investment as a private equity fund
within the hedge fund. Setting aside such investment also allows the
hedge fund to exclude the investment from the calculation of the
performance-based fee until it is sold while at the same time
maintaining its established valuation methodology to calculate
performance and other fees for its existing portfolio. However,
because of the inability to charge performance fees on the funds in
the side-pocket, some funds choose to estimate the value of private
equity investments.19 The infrequency of realization events of private
equity investments creates incentives for hedge fund managers to
avoid side pockets and instead use estimates for the valuation of
private equity investments. This in turn enables them to charge
performance fees for private equity investments just like the rest of
their portfolios. The ability to charge performance fees for private
19 If hedge funds estimate the valuations of private equity investments, they
may be required to agree to a “clawback,” i.e. recalculate fees and
reimburse under or overpayments that resulted from using estimates prior to
the realization event. Given the administrative burden and potential
cashflow impact, most managers try to avoid clawbacks if possible.
However, they may agree to clawbacks to use estimates that, in turn, enable
them to charge performance fees.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
equity investments based on estimates in combination with an
increase in the percentage of private equity investments in the
portfolio of hedge funds increasingly disincentivizes mangers from
using side pockets. Without the use of side pockets, estimates and
valuation errors that come with valuing assets held for long periods
will probably prevail.20
B. Fee Structure
The fee structure of hedge funds creates very strong financial
incentives to hide weak performance by way of valuation. Hedge
funds charge fees of up to 30 percent of profits and one to three
percent of assets under management. High water marks in
subscription agreements require fees of up to 30 percent of profits
that only will be paid out if the funds’ performance in the previous
year is exceeded. 21 These often-handsome fees are the reason for a
young and successful trader in an investment bank or larger mutual
fund to set up their own hedge fund to bring in investors. By way of
example, in 2008, the top 25 hedge fund managers, as measured by
compensation, earned $11.6 billion (though down from $22.5 billion
in 2007).22
The ability to attract investors is crucial especially in the first
two years of a hedge fund. The track record of a hedge fund is an
20 See, e.g., REPORT OF THE ASSET MANAGER’S COMMITTEE TO THE
PRESIDENT’S WORKING GROUP ON FINANCIAL MARKETS, BEST PRACTICES
FOR THE HEDGE FUND INDUSTRY, Jan. 15, 2009, at 20, available at http://
www.amaicmte.org/Public/AMC%20Report%20-%20Final.pdf [hereinafter
ASSET MANAGER’S COMMITTEE] (“Certain funds provide for side pockets to
protect investors by avoiding the need for them to transact (redeeming or
investing) in respect of such investments, where there is greater inherent
subjectivity in their valuation prior to realization or other key event.”).
21 A “high water mark” is an incentive for higher performance. If a hedge
fund starts investing with $100 million and grows in the first year to $200
million, the manager receives a significant performance fee. But, if the
manager does not enhance the performance in the second year to more than
$200 million, the fund will not obtain a performance fee at all. Similarly, if
the fund loses money in year two, the manager will not receive a
performance fee until the fund reaches the high water mark in the next
accounting period.
22 Louise Story, Top Hedge Fund Managers Do Well in a Down Year,
NYTIMES.COM, Mar. 24, 2009, http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/25/busi
ness/25hedge.html.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
important marketing tool, and managers have very strong incentives
to keep the track record and the performance of the fund at par with
their peers’ or the industry averages. The fee structure creates
incentives, while the valuation practices and problems create
opportunities, to overstate the performance of a fund.
Poor fund performance that drives down the amount of assets
under management could incentivize the valuation. Alongside a bear
market, poor performance puts pressure on expected revenue and
revenue growth rates.23 Such pressure is expected to continue and
grow as redemptions and investment declines are likely to cause
hedge fund assets to fall as much as 50 percent from their peak by
mid-2009.24 The current fee structure could come under pressure
from institutional and qualified investors if hedge funds and private
equity funds cannot sustain above-average performance. At the same
time, new low-cost vehicles are being introduced that mimic the
performance of hedge funds across a range of asset classes, offering
hedge fund performance at lower fees.25 The introduction of these
vehicles could result in increasing competition for investors. Such
competition, in turn, could result in downward pressure on the fee
structure of hedge funds, as increasing competition for qualified
investors could result in greater negotiating power for such investors.
Hedge funds would perhaps be able to justify lower performance
with lower fees. Lower performance and pressure on fees, however,
could incentivize the creative use of valuation problems.
C. Conflict of Interest of the Manager
As structured debt instruments and over-the-counter
derivatives used by hedge funds can be highly complex, the hedge
fund manager may be the only person who is in a position to
competently assess the value. This unique competency is particularly
problematic when one considers that the Net Asset Value (“NAV”)
23 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 6 (referencing
graphs).
24 Jenny Strasburg, Gregory Zuckerman & Cassel Bryan-Low, More Hedge
Funds Expected to Succumb, WALL ST. J., Nov. 22, 2008, at B2
(“Redemptions and investment declines will likely cause hedge-fund assets
to fall as much as 50 percent from their peak by mid-2009, Citigroup Inc.
said in a Nov. 16 research report.” (citing a Citigroup Inc. November 16
research report)).
25 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 39.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
of positions held by a hedge fund is used as the basis for the hedge
fund’s subscriptions, redemptions, and performance calculations.26
Performance calculations based on NAV are also used to advertise
the fund and charge performance and other fees to the investors. This
presents a conflict of interest for the managers. Often, investors do
not realize how and by whom their units are valued. Given the
conflicting responsibilities, managers have an incentive and the
ability to inappropriately over-value their portfolios.27
The issue of conflict management has been addressed
extensively in surveys.28 Because of the appearance of conflicts of
interest, it has become industry practice to carry out valuations and
NAV assessments by independent administrators. Sixty-one percent
of respondents to a survey conducted by Deloitte said that they use
independent administrators to calculate the official NAV and only
seven percent of fund managers stated that they carry out this
function themselves.29 According to a similar survey conducted by
Pricewaterhouse Coopers, 37 percent of respondents indicated that
they have instituted a formalized pricing committee and nearly half
(48 percent) have no plans to establish one.30
The surveys seem to indicate that the majority of industry
participants avoid conflicts of interest and recognize the importance
and neutrality of independent appraisers. However, it is important to
note that roughly one third of hedge funds may have occasion to
revise the prices used by the administrator in certain circumstances as
part of a reconciliation processes between manager, administrator,
and broker.31 Moreover, 30 percent of valuation committees in the
Deloitte survey had only one member and only 31 percent of
26 Feffer & Kundro, supra note 2 at 42.
27 See PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS, supra
note 5, at 9-10.
28 See, e.g., PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS, GLOBAL HEDGE FUND
VALUATION AND RISK MANAGEMENT SURVEY-INSIGHTS INTO CURRENT
INDUS. PRACTICES, Oct.-Sept. 2004, http://www.pwc.com/extweb/
pwcpublications.nsf/docid/8B84B51EEBC609A785256F5F007C62DF/$file
/globalhedgefundsurvey.pdf [hereinafter PWC]; DELOITTE, PRECAUTIONS
THAT PAY OFF—RISK MANAGEMENT AND VALUATION PRACTICES IN THE
GLOBAL HEDGE FUND INDUSTRY: A DELOITTE RESEARCH STUDY,
http://www.securitization.net/pdf/Deloitte/Precautions_24Jan07.pdf [here-
inafter DELOITTE].
29 See DELOITTE, supra note 28, at 13.
30 PWC, supra note 28 at 3.
31 DELOITTE, supra note 28, at 13.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
respondents in the Deloitte survey had a valuation committee with
three members or more. 32 Only 25 percent of respondents include a
valuation committee review as part of their regular operational risk
management.33
Even if independent administrators and valuation committees
are used, it is important to note that a majority of hedge funds in their
startup phase try to keep overheads down. Thus, they may have
problems with independence in a phase when independence would be
crucial. Also, an independent administrator is usually paid by the
hedge fund manager and may not understand all of the positions and
strategies employed by the manager. The administrator may not have
the understanding of complex securities products required to
appropriately value the positions, and the manager may remain the
person in charge of valuation even though formally that position has
been externalized. Had the administrator the required knowledge and
understanding of the complexities, he or she would probably be
incentivized to use that experience and understanding in a more
profitable setting.
D. Sophistication of Financial Instruments
The sophistication of financial instruments and the constant
invention and production of new instruments and structures often
make them difficult to price.34 Inherent or synthetic leverage of many
of these new instruments exacerbates valuation problems. Many of
these hard-to-value assets, including collateralized debt obligations
("CDOs") and collateralized loan obligations (“CLOs”), are so
complex that accurate valuation may never be achieved,35 in large
part due to the need to value “every single trade . . . based on its
characteristics.”36 In most cases, such valuation will inevitably be
subjective and, in the case of CDOs, the riskiest equity tranches
32 Id. at 14.
33 Id. at 14.
34 See INT’L ASS’N OF SEC. DEALERS, FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENT
CONSIDERATIONS: RECOMMENDED CHANGES TO THE IAS EXPOSURE
DRAFTS (2007), http://www.isda.org/c_and_a/pdf/Proposed-IAS39changes-
clean.pdf; Feffer & Kundro, supra note 2.
35 COUNTERPARTY RISK MANAGEMENT GROUP II, TOWARD GREATER
FINANCIAL STABILITY: A PRIVATE SECTOR PERSPECTIVE 132-33 (2005) ,
http://www.crmpolicygroup.org/crmpg2/.
36 Beales & Tett, supra note 18.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
present a particular challenge as they are exposed to potential
problems with the underlying collateral.37 Given recent scandals with
CDO devaluation,38 the issue of adequate valuation of complex
financial products remains at the forefront of the issue of hedge fund
valuation. 39
37See SATYAJIT DAS, CREDIT DERIVATIVES: CDOS AND STRUCTURED
CREDIT PRODUCTS (3d ed. 2005).
38 See Beales & Tett, supra note 18.
39 New approaches to derivatives and investment valuation develop
regularly and the academic debate remains very much in flux. For a
discussion of the underlying assumptions of valuation, see Mary Barth,
Including Estimates of the Future in Today’s Financial Statements (Bank of
Int'l Settlement Working Papers No. 208, 2006), available at
http://www.bis.org/publ/work208.htm; Claudio Borio & Kostas Tsatsaronis,
Risk in Financial Reporting: Status, Challenges and Suggested Directions
(Bank of Int'l Settlement Working Paper No. 213, 2006), available at
http://www.bis.org/publ/work213.pdf; Wayne Landsman, Fair Value
Accounting for Financial Instruments: Some Implications for Bank
Regulation (Bank of Int'l Settlement Working Paper No. 209, 2006),
available at http://www.bis.org/publ/work209.htm; Ken Peasnell, Institution
Specific Value (Bank of Int'l Settlement Working Paper No. 210, 2006),
available at http://www.bis.org/publ/work210.htm. For the use of either
historical costs or fair value of financial instruments, see Stephen G. Ryan et
al., Recommendations on Hedge Accounting and Accounting for Transfers
of Financial Instruments, ACCOUNTING HORIZONS, Mar. 2002 at 81-93
(2002). For a thorough discussion of the benefits of the Copula approach for
the valuation and hedging of correlation products and other derivatives, see
Leif Andersen, Jakob Sidenius & Sustana Basu, All Your Hedges in One
Basket, RISK, Nov. 2003, at 67-72; Douglas T. Breeden & Robert H.
Litzenberger, Price of State-Contingent Claims Implicit in Option Prices, 51
J. BUS., 621-51 (1978); Jens Carsten Jackwerth & Mark Rubinstein,
Recovering Probability Distributions from Options Prices, 51 J. FIN., 1611-
31 (1996); John Hull & Alan White, Valuation of a CDO and n-th to
Default CDS Without Monte Carlo Simulation, J. DERIVATIVES, at 8-23
(2004). For a critique of the Copula approach, see Allan Mortensen, Semi-
Analytical Valuation of Basket Credit Derivatives in Intensity-Based
Models, 13 J. DERIVATIVES, at 8-26 (2006). For a comparison of the efficacy
of low-discrepancy methods with Monte Carlo methods on the valuation of
financial derivatives and the benefits of the Sobol method of valuation, see
Spassimir H. Paskov, Computing High Dimensional Integrals with
Applications to Finance, (Columbia Univ. Tech Report, Dep't. of Comp.
Sci., 1994); Spassimir H. Paskov & Joseph F. Traub, Faster Valuation of
Financial Derivatives, 22 J. PORTFOLIO MGMT. 113 (1995); Joseph F. Traub
& Henryk Wozniakowski, Breaking Intractability, SCI. AM., Jan. 1994, at
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Several surveys indicate that complex financial products are
at the forefront of valuation problems.40 In a survey by Deloitte, fifty
out of the sixty total respondents (roughly 83 percent) confirmed that
they held at least one of the five asset classes that give rise to
valuation difficulties.41 Hedge funds are increasingly utilizing hard-
to-value instruments to enhance the performance of portfolios and to
manage risk.
Deloitte identified that most hedge funds rely on exchange
quotes, broker quotes, and third party or vendor pricing services to
value complex or illiquid assets.42 On the upside, relatively few
hedge fund managers use proprietary or purchase pricing models43,
which are notoriously unreliable.44 On the downside, 73 percent of
reporting fund managers use exchange quotes even though not
always accurate.45 Using exchange quotes is problematic if applied to
thinly traded assets, as the price for less frequently traded assets may
not be indicative of fair market value at the time of valuation,46 and
nearly a quarter of survey participants relied exclusively on these
quotes to value assets. 47 One third of respondents in the PWC survey
found that the process of valuation does not identify stale prices.48
According to PWC, only 50 percent of respondents perform “acid”
tests to compare transaction prices to prior valuation prices.49
According to the Deloitte survey, the problem with hard-to-value
assets is two-fold, in that the instruments are either highly complex
and/or thinly traded.50
102-07. For risk-neutral derivative security valuation, see CHI-FU HUANG &
ROBERT H. LITZENBERGER, FOUNDATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ECONOMICS
(1988). For the merits of canonical valuation see Michael Stutzer, A Simple
Nonparametric Approach to Derivative Security Valuation 51 J. FIN. 1633
(1996). For a discussion of the importance of valuing options on CDOs and
CDS portfolios, see Darrell Duffie, Credit Swap Valuation, 55 FIN.
ANALYSTS J., Jan.-Feb. 1999, at 73.
40 See, e.g., DELOITTE, supra note 28; PWC, supra note 28.
41 DELOITTE, supra note 28, at 15.
42 Id.
43 Id.
44 See generally NASIM N. TALEB, THE BLACK SWAN (2007).
45 Id.
46 Id.
47 Id.
48 PWC, supra note 28, at 4; DELOITTE, supra note 28, at 15.
49 PWC, supra note 28, at 4.
50 DELOITTE, supra note 28, at 15.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
E. Transparency
Transparency is one of the crucial factors in valuing hedge
fund units. The surveys indicate contradictory results that cannot be
explained with weighting or geographical area of respondents.
According to the 2007 Deloitte survey, over 30 percent of
respondents did not disclose valuation procedures to all investors,51
and only about 60 percent disclosed their risk management policy to
investors.52 According to Deloitte, best practice should demand that
hedge fund managers provide investors with the firm’s valuation
procedures at least annually and upon any material changes to these
procedures.53 The Deloitte survey found that, to the extent that hedge
funds did disclose valuation procedures to investors, almost three
fourths provided this information at least annually, whereas the
remaining one fourth did not provide valuation procedures on a
regular basis.54 PWC also found that about half of the respondents
did not feel any pressure from their investors to provide updated
information on valuation on a regular basis.55 This seems to indicate
an overall lack of voluntary disclosure to investors and could explain
recent trends and pressure from politicians and regulators to demand
more transparency from hedge fund managers.
Such lack of available risk data has precipitated solution
proposals including one for a requirement of mandatory disclosure of
risk positions to the SEC56 or to a systemic risk regulator.57 The
assessment of risk could entail a valuation analysis and would
51 DELOITTE, supra note 28, at 14.
52 Id. at 10.
53 Id. at 14.
54 Id. at 14.
55 PWC, supra note 28, at 6 (stating that only 52 percent of investors felt
increasing pressure from investors to disclose additional information).
56 Suggestions for Regulation of Hedge Funds Following the Financial
Crisis of 2008, Testimony Before the H. Comm. on Oversight and Gov’t
Reform, (2008) (statement of Professor David S. Ruder, Professor of Law
Emeritus, Northwestern University School of Law, former Chairman of the
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission) [hereinafter Testimony of
David Ruder].
57 Henry Paulson, Reform the Architecture of Regulation, FT.COM, TIMES,
Mar. 17, 2009, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/a2b1243c-1326-11de-a170-0000
779fd2ac.html?nclick_check=1.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
probably require an analysis of hard-to-value assets and complex
financial instruments.
III. Regulatory Proposals to Address Valuation Problems
The hedge fund industry has grown to 8,000 firms and approximately
$2 trillion in assets under management.58 Evidence of continual
growth reflects the importance of hedge funds as an alternative
investment group for both institutional and wealthy individual
investors.59 In 2003, hedge funds-of-funds started to aggressively
enter the market and are now selling hedge-fund-like products to
institutional investors and qualified individual investors.60 This
marketing has drawn increasing media attention to the sector and will
probably result in regulatory scrutiny.61
Regulators and international bodies have proposed best
practice guidelines and rules that in many cases impose burdens on
hedge funds.62 Some commentators have directly addressed the
industry-best-practice advice and criticized it.63 Their criticism
revolves around several central issues such as consistency in the
valuation process, sound management supervision and oversight and
strict independence and separation of duties.64 They have proposed,
for example, that a trader or portfolio manager should never perform
final valuations and, wherever possible, an independent third party
should check valuations prepared by the manager.65 Additionally,
fund managers should keep financial and accounting staff
independent of the portfolio management team.66 In terms of
58 ASSET MANAGER’S COMMITTEE, supra note 20, at 5.
59 Roundtable Discussions Relating to Hedge Funds, Notice of roundtable
discussions, Release No. IA-2117, 68 Fed. Reg. 15,488 (Mar. 31, 2003),
available at http://www.sec.gov/spotlight/hedgefunds.htm.
60 See e.g. Hanna Shaw Grove and Russ Alan Prince, The Street’s Latest
Lure,, NEWSWEEK, May 26, 2003 at 62 (stating that Wall street is tailoring
funds for the “mass affluent”—those with $25,000 or $50,000 to invest).
61 Id.
62 See infra Part III.B.
63 Feffer & Kundro, supra note 2.
64 Id. at 45 (“[F]und management companies and investors should 1) Insist
on strict independence and separation of duties; 2) Ensure consistency in the
valuation process, and; 3) Require a level of management supervision and
oversight.").
65 Id. at 46.
66 Id.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
consistency in the valuation process, timing seems to be of utmost
importance, requiring daily mark-to market and monthly as well as
quarterly pre-statement valuations.67 These periodical valuations
should be carried out according to well-defined processes; any
deviations from otherwise consistently applied sources, methods, and
models should be clearly noted and documented.68 As for appropriate
supervision and oversight,69 if the fund manager performs the
valuations him or herself, the manager should ensure that there is a
set of clearly documented policies and procedures in place and that
they are followed.70 To the extent possible, a fund manager should
try to outsource some of the valuation mechanics to third party
pricing services.71
A. Regulating Complex Financial Instruments
The hedge fund market is growing. New managers
increasingly emerge with new funds as they realize that they can be
more profitable if they are not tied to large institutions with huge
overheads. Most of these new managers focus their attention on
highly complex and profitable instruments where pricing and
valuation issues are most prevalent. This trend can make it very
difficult for hedge fund managers to guarantee their investors
standard or accurate pricing procedures.
U.S. accounting authorities expect companies to report the
fair value of their holdings using a “fair value hierarchy,”
distinguishing between those assets valued using markets and those
valued using “unobservable inputs.”72 The Financial Accounting
Standards Board (“FASB”) has also issued guidance as to Fair Value
67 Id.
68 Id.
69 BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS, THE INTERNATIONAL
CONVERGENCE OF CAPITAL MANAGEMENT AND CAPITAL STANDARDS 176
(2005), available at www.bis.org/publ/bcbs118.pdf (referencing valuation
paragraph 778(ii) of Basel II).
70 Feffer & Kundro, supra note 2, at 46 (“If the fund manager performs the
valuations themselves, there should be a set of clearly documented policies
and procedures, as well as a way of ensuring that those policies and
procedures are actually followed in practice . . .”).
71 Id. at 46.
72 Richard Beales & Gillian Tett, The Real Risks Emerge When Pandora’s
Investment Box is Opened, FIN. TIMES, June 29, 2007, at 41.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Measurements in FAS 15773 as to distinguishing between assets with
market-based valuations and those valued internally at the company
using “unobservable inputs.”74 According the FASB, “entry” and
“mark-to-model” prices do not reflect the realities of market behavior
and fair value reporting should, therefore, reflect an “exit price” if
and when an asset is sold.75 Risk measurement and management
technology can be instrumental in bridging the gap between
accounting standard setters and prudential authorities, thus
improving financial reporting and indirectly affecting hedge fund
valuation.76 Landsman points out that “regulators need to consider
how to let managers reveal private information in fair value estimates
while minimising strategic manipulation of mode inputs to manage
income and regulatory capital.”77 Mangers also need to consider how
best to minimize measurement errors in fair values to maximize their
usefulness to investors and creditors when making investment
decisions.78 Landsman concludes that regulators may want to ensure
that bank managers have incentives to select investments that
maximize economic efficiency of the banking system.79
Matching valuation principles for financial assets with fair
value principles may help to prevent complications for the
application of fair value principles.80 In addition, the market
environment of October 2008 precipitated the SEC's Office of the
Chief Accountant and the FASB staff to issue guidance to assist in
the determination of fair value.81 Under the guidance, expected cash
flows and other internal assumptions of hedge fund managers can be
used to measure fair value when relevant market evidence does not
exist.82
In the aftermath of the events of August and September
2008, the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act was signed into
73 FASB 157, supra note 18.
74 Beales & Tett, supra note 72.
75 FASB 157, supra note 18, at ¶¶ C16, C26.
76 See Borio & Tsatsaronis, supra note 39, at 2.
77 Landsman, supra note 39, at v.
78 Id.
79 Id.
80 See Peasnell, supra note 39, at v.
81 FASB Issue Clarification on Fair Value Accounting, Federal Securities
Law Reports, Issue No. 2351, No. 2348, Fed. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH) ¶2,348-1
(Oct. 8, 2008).
82 Id.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
law on October 3, 2008 (the "Act").83 Section 133 of the Act directs
the SEC to prepare a study on mark-to-market accounting standards
as provided for in FASB 157 and consider the effects of fair value
standards on the quality of information available to investors.84 The
Act also requires the SEC to consider alternatives to FASB 157.85 As
banks and life insurers continue to struggle with deteriorating
investment holdings, the FASB fast-tracked efforts to provide mark-
to-market relief for financial firms.86 Certain structured securities that
were rated lower than double-A at the time of origination can expect
some easing on mark-to-market requirements.87
B. Industry Valuation Proposals and Best Practice
Guidance
Due to the importance of hedge fund valuation and its impact
on the hedge fund industry, various groups and bodies, including
self-regulatory bodies, have commented on and made
recommendations as to how to tackle the issue.88 Interestingly, some
of the groups addressed the valuation problem, at least partly, in the
first wave of regulatory proposals in the wake of Long Term Capital
83 Pub. L. No. 110-343, 122 Stat. 3765 (2008).
84 Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 § 133, 12 U.S.C.A. §
5238 (2008).
85 Id. § 5238(a)(6).
86 Leslie Scism & David Reilly, FASB Reviews Valuation Method, WALL
ST. J., Dec. 23, 2008, at C1.
87 Id.
88 See, e.g., ASSET MANAGER CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT, supra note
10; REGULATORY APPROACHES, supra note 4; FIN. STABILITY FORUM
REPORT, supra note 10; ISDA 1999 COLLATERAL REVIEW, supra note 10;
PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS, supra note
5; PRIVATE EQUITY INDUSTRY GUIDELINES GROUP, US PRIVATE EQUITY
VALUATION GUIDELINES, (2004), available at http://www.peigg.org/images
/2004_1_Sep_U.S._PE_Valuation_Guidelines_Reissued.pdf [hereinafter
PEIGG]; PRIVATEEQUITYVALUATION.COM, INTERNATIONAL PRIVATE
EQUITY AND VENTURE CAPITAL VALUATION GUIDELINES (2006)
[hereinafter PRIVATE EQUITY GUIDELINES]; 2003 SOUND PRACTICES FOR
HEDGE FUND MANAGERS, supra note 10; VALUATION CONCEPTS FOR
INVESTMENT COMPANIES, supra note 10.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Management89 ("LTCM").90 More recent proposals address the
valuation problem.91
1. Hedge Fund Working Group92
The Hedge Fund Working Group ("HFWG"), a London-
based organization, identified in its Final Report on Hedge Fund
Standards93 two central themes: the segregation of functions in
valuation and hard-to-value assets.94 For the segregation of functions
in valuation, the HFWG recommends that valuation procedures be
aimed at mitigating conflicts of interest,95 by separating the valuation
responsibilities from portfolio management responsibilities.96 Other
recommendations include disclosure of the valuation process to
investors97 and including disclosure of a manager’s involvement of
the valuation process.98 The HFWG also made recommendations on
89 See REGULATORY APPROACHES, supra note 4; ISDA 1999 COLLATERAL
REVIEW, supra note 10; FIN. STABILITY FORUM REPORT, supra note 10.
90 LTCM was a leading hedge fund in 1998 and counted, among others,
Nobel laureate Gary Becker as a member of the board but failed due to a
combination of inadequate risk management strategies, high leverage, very
large positions, lack of funding liquidity and insufficient monitoring of fund
credit quality by counterparties. Its failure created systemic risk concerns
that eventually forced the New York Federal Reserve to orchestrate a bail-
out involving most of the top investment banks on Wall Street. See
generally Roger Lowenstein, How LTCM Came to the Edge of the Abyss,
WALL ST. J., Sept. 11, 2000, at C1 (excerpt from ROGER LOWENSTEIN,
WHEN GENIUS FAILED: THE RISE AND FALL OF LONG-TERM CAPITAL
MANAGEMENT (2000)).
91 See PEIGG, supra note 88, PRIVATE EQUITY GUIDELINES, supra note 88,
ASSET MANAGER CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT, supra note 10, ASSET
MANAGER CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT, supra note 10, PRINCIPLES
FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS, supra note 5.
92 The Financial Stability Forum Report also made similar recommendations
as to best handle valuation risk. STABILITY FORUM REPORT, supra note 10.
93 HFWG, supra note 3.
94 Id. at 54-63.
95 Id. at 47.
96 Id. at 48 (adding that "If a smaller of start-up manager considers it
impractical to do so, it should disclose this in its marketing documents and
do what it reasonably can to enable and encourage the fund governing body
to disclose this in the fund's offering documents.").
97 Id. at 49.
98 Id. at 57.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
how best to deal with hard to value assets, such as adopting and
disclosing standard procedures.99 Also, if a side pocket is used, the
HFWG recommends managers ensure that management fees for side
pocketed assets, if charged, are calculated on no more than the lower
of cost or fair value, and that performance fees for side-pocketed
assets are paid only at realization event or if a liquid market price is
available.100
2. The Private Equity Industry Guideline
Group
The Private Equity Industry Guideline Group has also
provided valuation guidelines.101 In light of the continuing
convergence of private equity and hedge funds, developments in
private equity guidelines are relevant for this paper. As with the
hedge fund industry, the key goals of these guidelines also focus on
consistency, transparency and prudence. More specifically, the
guidelines are intended to provide greater transparency into valuation
results through the use of a valuation policy committee (as described
in the guidelines); to focus the private equity industry on the need to
determine fair value for each of their investments in a manner that is
consistent with these guidelines; and to encourage managers to
approach valuation from a consistent, transparent and prudent
basis.102
3. CFA Code of Professional Conduct
Another industry group that has set up a code of professional
conduct is the Chartered Financial Analyst (“CFA”) institute.103 The
code directly addresses performance and valuation. The performance
and valuation provisions of the code entail provisions for the
manager to present performance information that is fair, accurate,
relevant, timely, and complete.104 Managers must not misrepresent
the performance of individual portfolios or of their firm.105
99 Id.
100 Id. at 62.
101 PEIGG, supra note 88; PRIVATE EQUITY GUIDELINES, supra note 88.
102 PEIGG, supra note 88.
103 ASSET MANAGER CODE OF PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT, supra note 10.
104 Id. at 5.
105 Id.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Moreover, managers should use fair market prices to value client
holdings and apply, in good faith, methods to determine the fair
value of any securities for which no readily available, independent,
third-party market quotation is available.106
4. IOSCO
The International Organisation of Securities Commissions
(“IOSCO”) committee has proposed nine basic principles to relieve
conflicts of interest of the hedge fund manager and enable investors
to obtain a guide as they consider putting money into hedge funds.107
The main suggestions are that hedge funds should draw up policies
for valuing investments, ensure they are used properly and apply
them as independently as possible. To the extent possible, valuation
methods should be made clear to investors. To avoid distortions that
could disadvantage investors, IOSCO’s guidelines for valuing hedge
funds emphasize consistency, transparency and independence.108
5. President’s Working Group Committees
The President’s Working Group Asset Manager’s Committee
and the Investor’s Committee were formed as private sector
committees by the President’s Working Group in September
2007.109 The primary task of the committees was to develop
guidelines that define best practices for the hedge fund
industry110 using the PWG's principles-based guidance.111 In the
106 Id.
107 PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS, supra
note 5, at 3-4; see also Alison Smith, FSA Has Hedge Fund Valuations in its
Sights, FIN. TIMES, Mar. 17, 2006, at 18 (discussing the FSA’s attempt to
help investors better evaluate the risks through improved regulations of the
hedge fund industry).
108PRINCIPLES FOR THE VALUATION OF HEDGE FUND PORTFOLIOS, supra note
5, at 3-4.
109 Press Release, U.S. Dept. of the Treasury, PWG Announces Private
Sector Groups to Address Market Issues for Private Pools of Capital ( Sept.
25, 2007), available at http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/hp575.htm.
110 Id., see also President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, Investor’s
Committee Mission Statement, available at http://www.ustreas.gov/press/
releases/reports/InvestorsCommMission09252007.pdf.
111 Press Release, U.S. Dept. of the Treasury, President’s Working Group
Releases Common Approach to Private Pools of Capital Guidance on hedge
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
context of the valuation issue, the Asset Manager’s Committee
suggested robust valuation procedures with a specific focus on
hard-­‐to-­‐value assets, the segregation of responsibilities,
oversight and other measures for the valuation of assets, and
thorough written policies.112 The Investor’s Committee, in turn,
addresses valuation policy, governance of the valuation process,
valuation methodologies and valuation controls with an overall
emphasis of transparency, independence, oversight, and effective
governance.113
IV. Retailization of the Hedge Fund Industry
A. Regulatory Recognition of Retailization
Before 1998, hedge fund regulation in many jurisdictions
had been limited. This situation allowed hedge funds to invest
without significant regulatory oversight but also precipitated much
uncertainty.114 Most regulatory proposals on hedge fund regulation
fund issues focuses on systemic risk, investor protection (Feb. 22, 2007),
available at http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/hp272.htm.
112 ASSET MANAGER’S COMMITTEE, supra note 20, at iii.
113 REPORT OF THE INVESTORS’ COMMITTEE TO THE PRESIDENT’S WORKING
GROUP ON FINANCIAL MARKETS, BEST PRACTICES FOR THE HEDGE FUND
INDUSTRY, April 15, 2008, 43-49, available at http://www.mintzgroup.com/
pdf/investors_committee_report.pdf.
114 In the U.S., the SEC in 1985 adopted a safe harbor rule for hedge fund
advisers. Definition of “Client” for Certain Purposes, Investment Advisers
Release No. 956, 50 Fed. Reg. 8740 (Mar. 5, 1985) (discussing 17 C.F.R. §
275.203(b)(3)-1)). See also Rules Implementing Amendments to the Invest-
ment Advisers Act of 1940, Investment Advisers Act Release No. 1633, 62
Fed. Reg. 28112 (May 22, 1997). The 1985 safe harbor rule allowed
counting each entity, i.e. each hedge fund rather than each individual
investor, as one client and, thus, effectively excused hedge fund
managers from registration under the IAA’s fifteen-­‐client limit.
Investment Advisers Act Section 203(b)(3), 15 U.S.C. § 80(b)(3) (2000).
Before the safe harbor provision, it had been issuing a long line of no-action
letters. See, e.g., B.J. Smith, SEC No-Action Letter, (CCH) (Dec. 25, 1975);
Wofsey, Rosen, Kweskin & Kuriansky, SEC No-Action Letter, (CCH)
(Apr. 25, 1974); David Shilling, SEC No-Action Letter, (CCH) (Apr. 3,
1976); Ruth Levine, SEC No-Action Letter, (CCH) (Dec. 15, 1976); S.S.
Program Limited, SEC No-Action Letter, (CCH) (Oct. 17, 1974); Hawkeye
Bancorporation, SEC No-Action Letter, (CCH) (June 11, 1971). In this
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
came after 1998 in the aftermath of the near-collapse and subsequent
bailout of LTCM. The LTCM case illustrates the risks surrounding
hedge funds that are highly leveraged, manage very large positions,
provide inadequate risk management strategies, lack funding
liquidity, and offer insufficient monitoring of fund credit quality by
counterparties. In the aftermath of LTCM's near-collapse,
international bodies and regulators reviewed ways to improve the
regulatory framework as it pertains to hedge funds.115
It is important to note that LTCM was unique because of the
large scale of its activities, the sheer size of its positions,116 and
market-making abilities in certain markets.117 Counterparties often
treated it more like an investment bank than a hedge fund.118 Unlike
LTCM, very few hedge funds today have market-making abilities;
they do not nearly use as much leverage as LTCM and their positions
can generally not move markets. Because LTCM was so unique
among its peers due to its leverage, the size of its positions and its
market making abilities, regulatory proposals mostly addressed
LCTM as a single case119 rather than the range of issues pertaining to
all hedge funds.
author’s opinion, reliance on SEC no-action letters led to significant
ambiguity in the area.
115 See BASEL COMMITTEE ON BANKING SUPERVISION, BANKS´
INTERACTION WITH HIGHLY LEVERAGED INSTITUTIONS (Jan. 1999). See also
TECHNICAL COMM. OF IOSCO, HEDGE FUNDS AND OTHER HIGHLY
LEVERAGED INSTITUTIONS (Nov. 1999); REPORT OF THE PRESIDENTS
WORKING GROUP ON FINANCIAL MARKETS, HEDGE FUNDS, LEVERAGE, AND
THE LESSONS OF LONG TERM CAPITAL MANAGEMENT (Apr. 1999);
COUNTERPARTY RISK MANAGEMENT POLICY GROUP, IMPROVING
COUNTERPARTY RISK MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (June 1999).
116 See U. S. GEN. ACCOUNTING OFFICE, REPORT TO CONGRESSIONAL
REQUESTERS: LONG-TERM CAPITAL MANAGEMENT—REGULATORS NEED
TO FOCUS GREATER ATTENTION ON SYSTEMIC RISK 5 (1999).
117 See BASLE COMM. ON BANKING SUPERVISION, BANK FOR INT’L
SETTLEMENTS, REPORT ON BANKS INTERACTIONS WITH HLIS 10 (1999)
(“For counterparties, the usual credit risks in transactions were magnified in
particular by LTCM’s size, its use of extensive leverage, its reliance on a
high degree of market liquidity, its concentration in certain markets and
instruments, and its highly secretive nature.”).
118 Interview with Michael Dubin, Hedge Fund of Funds Manager, Powers
& Dubin LLP, in N. Y., N. Y. (June 16, 2001).
119 It would probably be worth counting the number of references to LTCM
and contrast that with the references to hedge funds in general or other
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Recently, however, the regulatory debate is shifting from
proposals that addressed leverage and other problems that surfaced
after LTCM’s collapse towards issues relating to valuation of hedge
fund units. More important, with the emergence of retailization,
valuation of hedge fund units may become an increasingly
contentious issue. The regulatory proposals appearing soon after
LTCM did not adequately take valuation problems into account.
While qualified institutional investors have the means and experience
to value their investments in hedge funds and can usually afford to
hire lawyers and accountants or investment professionals to
determine the accuracy and value of their interests in a hedge fund,
retail investors rarely have such means at their disposal. Accordingly,
there is an increasing need to ascertain that hedge fund units are
accurately valued before they are introduced to the public. Regulators
and legislatures in many jurisdictions have recognized the need to
consider the issues as they pertain to retail investors of hedge funds.
So far, however, regulators and legislatures have not addressed the
issue of valuation and its interplay with retail investors. The
following section gives an overview of the retailization phenomenon
and the regulatory actions it has precipitated in the United Kingdom,
the United States of America, the European Union and Germany.
1. United Kingdom
In the United Kingdom, the Financial Services Authority
(“FSA”), in its consultation with the public, asked if retailization of
hedge funds should be allowed.120 This sparked a lively debate.121 As
hedge funds can be “investment companies” and can have a
corporate structure in the UK, they are publicly marketable once they
are listed. Alternatively, hedge funds may be structured as limited
specifically named hedge funds. The author would conjecture that a
statistically significant skew towards the word LTCM would be noticeable.
120 FIN. SERV. AUTH., DISCUSSION PAPER 16, HEDGE FUNDS AND THE FSA
(2002) [hereinafter FSA DISCUSSION PAPER] (presenting sample questions
asked of public respondents regarding whether regulators should allow
retailization of hedge funds).
121See ASHLEY KOVAS, BUNDESVERBAND ALTERNATIVE INV.,
DEVELOPMENTS IN HEDGE FUND REGULATION—A UK PERSPECTIVE (2003)
(introducing arguments from both sides of the debate: regulators who want
to together their rules regarding hedge funds versus regulators that
contemplate liberalization of hedge fund management).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
partnerships or trusts, thus regulated as “collective investment
schemes,” and are, as such, marketable to certain “sophisticated”
investors,122 institutional investors123 and, to a considerably more
limited extent, to retail investors. The FSA also extended the scope
of authorized collective investment schemes,124 thereby allowing
hedge funds to be more broadly marketed with some limitations.
Hedge funds of funds were also authorized for the first time.
It is noteworthy, however, that the FSA decided not to
liberalize the retail market further than described above125 and
prohibited retailization of hedge funds of funds by prohibiting
marketing of hedge funds of funds through authorized onshore
vehicles. This may be a result of a lacking demand for
retailization.126 Existing hedge funds still prefer to have “a small
number of very sophisticated investors who understand the nature of
the funds and will leave their investments in the fund for a
122 INVESTOR RISK COMM., INT’L ASS’N OF FIN. ENGINEERS, VALUATION
CONCEPTS FOR INVESTMENT COMPANIES AND FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND
THEIR STAKEHOLDERS (2004), available at http://iafe.org/html/documents/
IAFEValuationConcepts0604_000.pdf .
123 INVESTOR RISK COMM., INT’L ASS’N OF FIN. ENGINEERS, HEDGE FUND
DISCLOSURE FOR INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS (2001), available at http://
iafe.org/html/upload/IRCConsensusDocumentJuly272001.pdf (recognizing
that IRC understood that various investors, including pension funds,
endowments, foundations, insurance companies and fund of funds would
find different hedge fund formats relevant to their individual needs).
124 See FIN. SERV. AUTH., CONSULTATION PAPER 185, THE CIS
SOURCEBOOK—A NEW APPROACH (2003) [hereinafter FSA CONSULTATION
PAPER] (describing the introduced two-tier CIS scheme, which would allow
flexibility based on consumer experience and expertise and whether or not
the consumer was a retail investor).
125Id. (acknowledging that despite liberalization, the proposed funds
available for retail and non-retail market will still be subject to authorization
and regulation in order to differentiate them from unregulated funds); FIN.
SERV. AUTH., DISCUSSION PAPER 05/4, HEDGE FUNDS: A DISCUSSION OF
RISK AND REGULATORY ENGAGEMENT (2005), available at
www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/discussion/dp05_04.pdf (“[W]here a hedge fund is
structured as an unregulated collective investment scheme (CIS), as many of
them are, they can be marketed to very limited classes of investors.”).
126 Kovas, supra note 121, at 21-22 (“[T]he FSA was not deluged with
demands that this should happen. Most existing hedge funds do not
welcome the prospect of large number of retailers investing directly into
their funds.”).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
reasonable period of time.”127 Despite the limits to retailization,
hedge funds in the UK are undoubtedly becoming more mainstream
investment products than in the past.128
2. United States
Hedge funds under U.S. jurisdiction usually do not raise funds
through public offerings, they do not advertise broadly, or engage in
general solicitation, thereby avoiding regulation of the SEC and the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”). Utilizing its
rule-making authority under the Investment Advisers Act (“IAA”),129
the SEC, in December 2004, issued a final rule to require hedge fund
advisers to register under the IAA.130 The rule was eventually issued
only by a three-to-two vote,131 and then overturned by the D.C.
Circuit in 2006.132
In adopting the hedge fund advisor registration rule, the SEC
cited the growth of the hedge fund industry, retailization, “the
broadening exposure of investors to hedge fund risk, and the growing
number of instances of malfeasance by hedge fund advisers” as the
127 Id at 22.
128 FSA DISCUSSION PAPER, supra note 120, at § 3.5 (presenting data
showing that UK hedge funds have experienced rapid growth since 1990
and that their assets under management have grown fivefold between 1994
and 2001).
129 Investment Advisers Act §211(a), 15 U.S.C. 80b-11(a) (2000). Section
211(a) asserts that the Commission may adopt rules “necessary or
appropriate to the exercise of the functions and powers conferred upon the
Commission elsewhere in this title” and “may classify persons and matters
within its jurisdiction and prescribe different requirements for different
classes of persons and matters.” Id. See also Investment Adviser Act, 15
U.S.C. §§ 80b-2(a)(17) (2000) (“The Commission may by rules and
regulations classify, for the purposes of any portion or portions of this title,
persons, including employees controlled by an investment adviser.”).
130 Registration Under the Advisers Act of Certain Hedge Fund Advisors,
69 Fed. Reg. 72,054 (Dec. 10, 2004) (codified at 17 C.F.R. §§275 & 279
(2008)) [hereinafter Registration Under the Advisors Act] (codifying the
requirement for advisors of certain private investment pools to register with
the SEC pursuant to the Investment Adviser Act).
131 For the history of U.S. hedge fund regulation before Goldstein v. Sec.
Exch. Comm’n, 451 F.3d 873 (D.C. Cir. 2006), see WULF A. KAAL, HEDGE
FUND REGULATION BY BANKING SUPERVISION—A COMPARATIVE
INSTITUTIONAL ANALYSIS 177-98 (Peter Lang 2006) (2005).
132 Goldstein v. Sec. & Exch. Comm’n, 451 F.3d 873 (D.C. Cir. 2006).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
main reasons why the previous regulatory scheme for hedge fund
advisers was inadequate.133 Among the most obvious arguments for
its regulation, the SEC referred to possible prevention or
diminishment of losses that hedge fund investors might otherwise
experience as a result of hedge fund advisers’ fraud.134 To support
the regulation, the SEC referred to several studies that seem to
suggest that hedge fund fraud was on the rise. The SEC also referred
to the increased exposure of small investors as a result of the
decrease in minimum investment requirements135 and the additional
dangers that are associated with this phenomenon.136 Contrasting
these benefits with costs associated with a registration requirement
for hedge funds, the SEC emphasized that it was “sensitive” to the
costs and benefits that result from the rule.137 In the section on cost
benefits analysis to justify its rulemaking in Rule 203(b) (3)-2 under
the IAA, the SEC identified, among others, the benefits to hedge
fund investors by deterring fraud and curtailing losses, providing
basic information about hedge fund advisers, and improved
compliance controls.138 The SEC also saw benefits to mutual fund
investors, other investors and markets, regulatory policy, and hedge
fund advisers.
Commissioners Cynthia A. Glassman and Paul S. Atkins
opposed releasing the final rule.139 Despite an emphasis by the
majority on the risks of retailization, the dissenting commissioners
pointed to the 2003 Staff Report, which found that retailization was
133 See Registration Under the Advisers Act, supra note 130, at 72,059.
134 Id. at 72,078 (“Registration allows us to conduct examinations of hedge
fund advisers, and our examinations provide a strong deterrent to advisers'
fraud, identify practices that may harm investors, and lead to earlier
discovery of fraud that does occur.”).
135 See STAFF REPORT TO THE U. S. SECURITIES AND EXCH. COMM’N,
IMPLICATIONS OF THE GROWTH OF HEDGE FUNDS 81 (Sept. 2003)
[hereinafter SEC Staff Report].
136 See Registration Under the Advisers Act, supra note 130, at 72,057
(noting several sources acknowledging that hedge fund expansions attract
investors that were previously too risk averse).
137 Id. at 72,078 .
138 Id. at 72,078-79 (listing benefits to include a strong deterrent to advisers'
fraud, identification of practices that may harm investors, earlier discovery
of existing fraud, the ability to screen individuals seeking to advise hedge
funds, and to deny entry to those with a history of disciplinary problems).
139 Id. at 72,089.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
not an issue140 and argued that the inflow of funds is already so rapid
that hedge fund advisers had more to invest than they could handle
and were in no need to solicit retail investors.
In Goldstein141, the D.C. Circuit struck down the hedge fund
rule as an instance of arbitrary rulemaking by the SEC.142 In vacating
the rule, the D.C. Circuit underscored the substantive limits of
agency rule-making power and rejected the SEC’s position that it had
authority to determine the meaning of the term “client” where the
term had not been otherwise defined in the Advisers Act.143 Many
advisers who had previously registered under the rule decided to de-
register. Reacting to Goldstein, the SEC dramatically expanded the
fraud protection for investors144 and proposed to increase the
"accredited investor" standards under Regulation D.145 Regulation D
defines the term “accredited investor” as a natural person whose
individual net worth, or joint net worth with such person’s spouse,
exceeds $1,000,000 at the time of the purchase146 or whose
individual income exceeds $200,000 (or joint income with the
person’s spouse exceeds $300,000) in each of the two most recent
years and who has a reasonable expectation of reaching the same
income level in the year of investment.147 The SEC proposal
envisaged raising the numerical requirement in Regulation D by
140 See SEC Staff Report, supra note 135, at 80 (“[T]he staff has not
uncovered evidence of significant numbers of retail investors investing
directly into hedge funds.”).
141 451 F.3d 873 (D.C. Cir. 2006).
142 Id. at 884 (“[T]he Hedge Fund Rule only exacerbates whatever problems
one might perceive in Congress’s method for determining who to regulate.
The Commission’s rule creates a situation in which funds with one hundred
or fewer investors are exempt from the more demanding Investment
Company Act, but those with fifteen or more investors trigger registration
under the Advisers Act. This is an arbitrary rule.”).
143 Id. at 881-83.
144 See Prohibition of Fraud by Advisors to Certain Pooled Investment
Vehicles; Accredited Investors in Certain Private Investment Vehicles,
Investment Advisers Act Release No. 33-8766, 72 Fed. Reg. 400 (proposed
Dec. 27, 2006) [hereinafter SEC Proposed Rules] (explaining provisions of
the proposed rule allowing the SEC to bring enforcement actions against
investment advisers who defraud investors or prospective investors).
145 Id. at 405.
146 Definitions and terms used in Regulation D, 17 C.F.R. § 230.501(a)(5)
(2008).
147 Id. § 230.501(a)(6).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
adding to the net worth or income test specified in rule 501(a)148 or
rule 215,149 a requirement of ownership of at least $2.5 million in
investments.150
The SEC has not put this rule proposal in the context of
retailization, but the reasoning for the proposal that "natural persons
may have indirect exposure to private pools,”151 and “many
individual investors today may be eligible to make investments in
privately offered investment pools as accredited investors that
previously may not have qualified as such for those investments,"152
seems to indicate that retailization was a major concern.153 The
proposed rule has not yet been adopted.
3. European Union
In European Member States, except for the UK, retailization
has not been an issue because the hedge fund industry was less
developed. However, reacting to increased concerns over investor
protection, the European Union, in various directives attempted to
address concerns of inadequate hedge fund oversight. Among those
are the Market Abuse Directive ("MAD"),154 the Markets in Financial
148 Id. § 230.501(a).
149 Id. § 230.215.
150 SEC Proposed Rules, supra note 144, at 414 (clarifying that in addition
to other Regulation D requirements, an accredited investor must own not
less than $ 2.5 million in investments, after inflation adjustment).
151 Id. at 404.
152 Id. at 409.
153 Id. at 405 ("As proposed, the term accredited natural person would
include any natural person who meets the requirements specified in the
current definition of accredited person, as that term relates to natural
persons, and would add a requirement that such person also must own
(individually, or jointly with the person’s spouse) not less than $2.5 million
(as adjusted every five years for inflation) in investments at the time of
purchase of securities issued by private investment vehicles under
Regulation D or section 4(6).").
154 Commission Directive 04/72 art. 1-14, 2004 O. J. (L 162) 70 (EC)
(implementing Directive 2003/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council as regards accepted market practices, the definition of inside
information in relation to derivatives on commodities, the drawing up of
lists of insiders, the notification of managers' transactions and the
notification of suspicious transactions).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Instruments Directive ("MIFID"),155 the Capital Requirements
Directive ("CRD"),156 and the Undertakings for Collective
Investment in Transferable Securities (“UCITS”) Directive.157
Although all of these directives impact hedge funds in several ways,
the UCITS Directive attempts to address the risks posed by
retailization. The UCITS Directive improves investors’ protection by
replacing the simplified prospectus requirement with a requirement
for Key Investor Information (“KII”), 158 thus attempting to ensure
that investors receive clear, easily understandable and relevant
information when they envisage investing in UCITS.159 KII is a
155 Commission Directive 04/39, art. 1-73, 2004 O. J. (L 145) 1 (EC).
156 The Directive is also called Basel II or Capital Requirements Directive /
Market Risk Directive. Council Directive 93/6, art. 1-15, 1993 O. J. (L 141)
1, (EEC) (explaining proposed requirements regarding capital adequacy of
investment firms and credit institutions).
157 Council Directive 85/611, art. 1-59, 1985 O.J. (L375) 3 (EC)
(pronouncing the EEC’s position on the co-ordination of laws, regulations
and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective
investment in transferable securities (UCITS)). The original UCITS
Directive came into effect in 1989, setting out certain minimum conditions
that a collective investment scheme (“CIS”) needed to meet to be sold on a
cross-border basis. However, its scope was limited to schemes invested in
shares and bonds, and whilst the manager of the scheme could market that
scheme in other member states, it could not carry out other investment
services. Accordingly, the European Commission proposed two amending
directives: Management Directive and Product Directive. Both of them were
formally adopted on January 21, 2002. See Council Directive 01/107, art. 1-
5, 2002 O. J. (L 041) 20, 2034 (EC) (“amending Council Directive
85/611/EEC . . . with a view to regulating management companies and
simplified prospectuses”); Council Directive 01/108, 2002 O. J. (L 041) 35,
35-42 (EC) (“amending Council Directive 85/611/EEC . . . with regard to
investments of UCITS”).
158 Before KII, the simplified prospectus had to be provided to investors
prior to their subscription to the fund and was originally intended to provide
the average retail investor with basic information about the fund to enable
the retail investor to make an informed investment decision. After
consultation with the regulators, the industry and consumers, it became
apparent, however, that the simplified prospectus did not allow for useful
comparisons of investment options as it was still too long and complex.
Thus, the attempt to improve the information investors receive with the KII.
159 Press Release, European Union, Financial Services: Commission
Proposes Improved EU Framework for Investment Funds (July 16, 2007),
available at http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/08/
1161&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
relatively short document that summarizes key facts to retail
investors in a clear and understandable manner focusing on strategy
and objectives, risk and reward, as well as performance and charges,
allowing retail investors to compare key features of various hedge
funds. Additionally, KII is provided in the language of the country
where the fund is marketed to the investor.
4. Germany
In Germany, retailization and the associated concerns have to
be seen in light of the socio-economic realities of German politics.
Politicians and regulators in Germany, partially to appease their
constituencies who were increasingly exposed to the effects of a
globalized economy, set out to fend off and marginalize activist
hedge funds. They are primarily concerned because private equity
firms and foreign wealth funds are becoming increasingly important
in global financial markets due to their financial resources.160 During
the national election campaign in April 2005, Franz Müntefering, the
Chairman of the German Social Democratic Party, likened private
equity firms and hedge funds to a swarm of locusts descending on
firms and firing employees.161 Germany is particularly active in the
international debate on improvements of regulation of international
financial markets and made tighter regulation of global financial
industries one of its core objectives during its presidency of the G-8
in 2007.162
Given this background of regulatory initiatives and political
fear mongering, it is perhaps not surprising that retailization of hedge
funds remains a rather contentious issue in Germany. German and
international banks had for years tried to persuade investors in
160 Hubert Zimmermann, Cornell University, Controlling the Locusts:
Germany and the Global Governance of New Financial Markets, Address at
the ISA 49th Annual Convention, (Mar. 23, 2008), available at http://www.
allacademic.com/meta/p254581_index.html (arguing that one of the two
phenomena subject of the German initiative was “the emergence of hedge
funds and private equity as major actors”).
161See Editorial, Deutschland AG, FIN. TIMES, Aug. 21, 2008, available at
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/9d5e1c10-6fb6-11dd-986f-0000779fd18c.html.
162 See Zimmermann, supra note 160 (acknowledging that Germany has
been predominantly active in improving the regulation of international
financial markets and made this one of their main goals while presiding the
G-8 in 2007).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Germany of the advantages of hedge funds, while politicians and
regulators repeatedly warned of the dangers. The enactment of the
Investment Act in December 2003163 only partially alleviated these
fears. Hedge funds of funds, such as DWS Xavex Hedge Select,
among others,164 have opened the world of hedge funds to retail
investors—DWS Xavex Hedge Select allows German retail investors
to participate with an initial investment of as low as €1,000.
However, the risk exposure for retail investors is probably not
comparable with that of qualified investors in other jurisdictions as
hedge funds of funds in Germany are still covered by the legislation
and the investor protection rules pertaining to mutual funds.
B. Retailization in Practice
Hedge funds are exempt from certain U.S. securities laws
provided they do not advertise or otherwise hold themselves out to
the public, limit the resale of their securities, and curtail the sale of
their securities to only a limited number of wealthy investors.165
Hedge funds generally comply with these requirements and limit the
sale of their securities to sophisticated and wealthy investors.166
Some recent developments, however, would perhaps indicate that the
prevailing orthodoxy could be under pressure. For instance, the
aforementioned Regulation D provides a safe harbor under Section
4(2) of the Securities Act of 1933 and defines “accredited investor”
as including, among other things, a person with a net worth of more
than one million dollars.167 Inflation may have eroded the
significance of a million dollar net worth as a proxy for investor
sophistication under Regulation D. As noted earlier, to update the
safe harbor numerical standards for hedge fund investors, the SEC
163 Investmentmodernisierungsgesetz (InvG), Dec. 19, 2003, BGBl. at 62,
amended Dec. 4, 2004, BGBl. at 3166, art. 8, §8.
164 Other German hedge funds include Deutsches Wertpapier Sparen DWS
Xavex Hedge Select, Commerzbank’s ADZ Fund, Dresdner Bank AG AI
Global Hedge Certificate.
165 See Houman B. Shadab, Fending for Themselves: Creating a U.S. Hedge
Fund Market for Retail Investors, 11 N. Y. U. J. LEGIS. & PUB. POL’Y 251,
285-90 (2008).
166 But see id. at 309-18 (arguing normatively for the establishment of a
hedge fund market for retail investors).
16717 C.F.R. § 230.501(a)(5) (2008).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
has proposed amendments to Regulation D.168 It would perhaps be
difficult to determine what level of wealth should be a proxy for
assumed "sophistication" of investors.
1. U.S. Blue Sky Law Exemptions for
Investment Advisors
The SEC has engaged in a theoretical discussion of
retailization in the context of hedge fund fraud.169 Hedge fund
managers are mostly investment advisors under U.S. Federal Law170
but are exempt from registration if they provide investment advisory
services to fewer than fifteen clients, do not provide advisory
services to registered investment companies, and do not hold
themselves out to the public as an adviser.171 Almost all hedge fund
managers mostly comply with these requirements to earn and
maintain exemption from registration as an investment adviser under
federal rules.172 Without exemptions, they would be subject to SEC
168 SEC Proposed Rules, supra note 144, at 405-08 (proposing a two-step
approach to determine whether an individual is an accredited investor. First
step is whether the individual meets the test in rule 501(a) or rule 215 and
the second step is whether the individual owns at least $2.5 million in
investments); see also Testimony of David Ruder, supra note 56, at 5 n.8.
169See Registration Under the Advisors Act, supra note 130 at 8-9
(discussing that non-traditional entities are participating in the hedge fund
market and losses resulting from hedge fund frauds might put at risk the
entities’ ability to meet their obligations); see also SEC Proposed Rules,
supra note 144, at 401-07 (implying that retailization has exposed more
natural persons to the risks of hedge fund fraud).
170 See Investment Advisers Act of 1940 § 202(a)(11), 15 U.S.C. § 80b-
2(a)(11) (2000).
171 Investment Advisers Act of 1940 § 203(b)(3), 15 U.S.C. § 80b-3(b)(3)
(2000) (excluding from mandatory registration those advisers that have had
less than fifteen clients in the last year “and who neither holds himself out
generally to the public as an investment adviser nor acts as an investment
adviser to any investment company”).
172 It is unclear what role investment adviser registration with the SEC plays
in the current environment. Some of the data made available to the author
by Robert E. Place of the SEC's Investment Management Division
highlights the importance of Goldstein v. Sec. & Exch. Comm’n, 451 F.3d
873 (D.C. Cir. 2006): "11,292 investment advisers are registered with the
Commission with total AUM of $43 trillion. 1,845 or 16 percent of these
advisers are identified by Form ADV as hedge fund advisers. 790 hedge
fund advisers have registered since January 1, 2005 (and are still registered).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
inspections, books and record keeping requirements,173 disclosure
requirements,174 code of ethics requirements,175 and significantly
higher legal fees. Hedge fund managers have incentives to bring in
investors as soon as possible to make a new hedge fund operational,
but it is vital in this process to keep the number of investors below
fifteen. Even though a "client" under the IAA can include legal
entities,176 hedge fund managers would probably want to make sure,
especially in the start-up phase of a fund, that they maximize the
counting of potential clients that would be excluded from the fifteen-
client limit under federal law. Such clients could be retail investors
who could qualify to invest under state specific de minimis
exemptions.
Under de minimis exemptions in state Blue Sky laws, there
could be several scenarios in which retail investors would be able to
invest in hedge funds and hedge-fund-like-vehicles. There would
probably also be several reasons why hedge fund managers would
consider bringing in retail investors for a hedge fund under such
exemptions. If the hedge fund manager wants to bring U.S. investors
into the fund and the respective investors are residents of certain
states, the fund manager would have to register as an investment
adviser under the respective state laws if the state does not have a de
minimis exemption that exempts the manager from registration. Such
registration under state law would require filing a Form ADV, used
217 of these advisers have registered since the Goldstein decision (June 23,
2006). 169 hedge fund advisers are located outside the U.S. 11,710 private
investment funds (“PIF”) identified; (10,029 PIFs once duplicate names are
removed). $3 trillion in private investment fund assets identified; ($2.6
trillion in PIF assets once duplicate names are removed). 753 or 30 percent
of the HF advisers that were identified on June 23, 2006, either withdrew
their registration or had their registration cancelled. 382 or 15 percent of the
HF advisers that were identified on June 23, 2006, have been reclassified as
non hedge fund advisers because of changes they made to their Form
ADV." Email from Robert E. Place, Inv. Mgmt. Div., Sec. & Exch.
Comm’n, to author (Dec. 10, 2008) (on file with author).
17317 C.F.R. § 275.204-2 (2008).
174 Id. § 275.204-3.
175 Id. § 275.204A-1 (requiring registered investment advisers to “establish,
maintain and enforce a written code of ethics,” subject to some minimum
requirements included in the rule).
176 Id. § 275.203(b)(3)-1(a)(2).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
by the SEC to federally register certain investment advisers,177 with
the appropriate state through the Investment Advisor Registration
Depository, which would cause significant transaction costs.
Especially in the start-up phase of a hedge fund, the manager may
want to avoid such costs. The manager would also probably want to
avoid having to worry about what kind of investors to bring into the
fund and whether they would need to be qualified investors in order
to be acceptable. The manager would probably also want to use
existing investors in the fund as a form of advertising for the fund to
bring in additional investors Additionally, the manager would
probably like to establish a track record and get the fund operational
as soon as possible. Accordingly, certain state de minimis investment
adviser registration exemptions for investors could be an attractive
alternative to federal laws for hedge fund manager, especially in the
start-up phase of a hedge fund.
Investment adviser registration exemptions under state Blue
Sky laws would probably not suffice to explain the phenomenon of
retailization or justify any data insufficiencies. Theoretically,
however, it appears to give some indication as to how previously
unqualified investors would perhaps be able to gain access to the
hedge fund world. A possible explanation for retailization gives only
limited guidance for researchers. The quantification of the economic
significance of retail investors in hedge funds would be important, as
such quantification would probably help researchers understand the
origins of retailization. A data-supported determination of the origins
of retailization, in turn, would probably help researchers understand
if retail investors in hedge funds would warrant special regulatory
attention.178
Eighty-five percent of hedge fund assets under management
globally are located in U.S. and U.K. jurisdictions.179 A majority of
such fund assets may be located in the U.S. The analysis of de
minimis rules under Blue Sky laws could be a starting point to
determine if and how retailization of hedge funds is taking place.180
177 See generally Sec. & Exch. Comm’n, Answers: Form ADV, http://www.
sec.gov/answers/formadv.htm (last visited Apr. 20, 2009).
178 Cf. SEC Proposed Rules, supra note 144, at 401-07 (suggesting that the
SEC has previously used retailization as an argument to justify hedge fund
fraud rules).
179 HFWG, supra note 3, at 3.
180 States that have de minimis exemptions would, in most cases, allow up to
five investors to invest in hedge funds without qualification requirements
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
In lieu of such analysis, some conclusions could perhaps be drawn
from analyzing the existence of de minimis rules in states with the
highest percentage of hedge fund assets under management. 181 This
methodology is based on the assumption the higher the number of
assets under management in a state, the higher the potential access
rate for retail investors.182
TABLE 1: LOCATION OF HEDGE FUNDS WITH AT LEAST $1 BILLION IN
AUM183
Location Number of Billion Dollars % of AUM
Funds AUM
New York 144 973.4 68.01%
Connecticut 30 198 13.83%
California 32 133.9 9.36%
Massachusetts 11 83.3 5.82%
Texas 11 42.6 2.98%
Table 1, above, indicates that a majority of assets under
management in the U.S. are located in New York State. Under New
York law, any person who has more than five investment advisory
clients in New York, excluding financial institutions and institutional
buyers, is required to register with the State of New York as an
investment adviser.184 Before the rule was adopted by the New York
Attorney General on January 29, 2003, many hedge fund managers in
New York had not been subject to regulation because they were
for these investors and without requiring the hedge fund manager to register
as an investment advisor.
181 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 11-12
(referencing a table showing "Top 5 States by Income").
182 It is unclear if the percentage of assets under management per U.S. state
would be correlated with the resident status of potential retail investors in
hedge funds. Assuming that the majority or at least a significant percentage
of total income of a hedge fund would perhaps be collected from investors
who are residents in the state in which the respective hedge fund is
registered, it would perhaps be possible to identify retail investors from such
states who could have invested in hedge funds under such state's Blue Sky
Law de minimis exceptions.
183 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 11-12
184 N.Y. GEN. BUS. LAW § 359-eee (2007).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
exempt under the previous New York State de minimis rule that
provided an exemption for persons who sold investment advisory
services to less than forty persons within the state of New York.185
Similarly, the New Jersey legislature is expected to cancel the current
de minimis exemption allowing five clients or less from New Jersey
without triggering an investment adviser requirement.186 The State of
Connecticut, following New York State in hedge fund assets under
management,187 also provides a de minimis exemption under which a
hedge fund manager does not have to register as an investment
adviser provided the manager has less than five clients from
Connecticut and no place of business in the state.188 Illinois has a
similar rule.189
Massachusetts Law also provides a de minimis rule that
allows for less than six clients who were residents of Massachusetts
within the past 12 months provided that the investment advisor does
not have a place of business in the State of Massachusetts.190 The
State of California has a similar rule.191 Texas, however, even though
it technically provides a de minimis exemption for investment
advisers with fewer than six clients within the past twelve months,192
still requires a notice filing through Form ADV—Part I.193
In this small sample of states, a statistically significant
majority (six out of seven) provides de minimis rules that would
allow some access for retail investors. It is unclear if an increase in
185 WARD B. HINKLE, HODGSONRUSS, LLP, INVESTMENT ADVISER ALERT,
CHANGES IN NEW YORK REGULATORY SCHEME—NEW RULES TRIGGER
NEW REGISTRATION AND FILING REQUIREMENTS, INVESTMENT ADVISER
ALERT (2003), available at http://www.hodgsonruss.com/files/1_2_1/Invest
Advise2003WBH.pdf.
186 N.J. STAT. ANN. § 49:3-56(g) (2001).
187 See IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 11-12.
188 CONN. GEN. STAT. § 36b-6e (2007).
189ILL. ADMIN. CODE tit. 14, § 130.805 (2006).
190 MASS. GEN. LAWS ANN. ch. 110A, § 401(m)(1)(G) (2002).
191 CAL. CORP. CODE § 25202(a) (2005).
192 Texas Securities Act §12-1 (2003); 7 TEX. ADMIN. CODE §
7:116.1(b)(2)(A) (2008).
193 7 TEX. ADMIN. CODE § 7:116.1(b)(2)(C) (2008). “[Form ADV] Part 1
contains information about the adviser's education, business and disciplinary
history within the last ten years.” Sec. & Exch. Comm’n, Answers: Form
ADV, http://www.sec.gov/answers/formadv.htm (last visited Apr. 20,
2009).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
the sample size to all fifty states would change the distribution
significantly.
2. CFTC Rules
In addition to Federal law and state securities laws, hedge
funds and their advisers may have to comply with the Commodity
Exchange Act ("CEA") and rules promulgated by the Commodities
Futures Trading Commission ("CFTC”). In 1998, the CFTC
established that engaging in even one commodity futures transaction
would precipitate a hedge fund’s consideration as a "commodity
pool".194 Along the same lines, if a hedge fund manager provides
futures advice to the hedge fund, the manager will typically be
considered a Commodity Pool Operator ("CPO")195 or "Commodity
Trading Adviser" ("CTA").196
In the context of retailization, the CEA, like state securities
laws, also provides a de minimis exemption from CTA registration.197
For purposes of counting clients, certain business organizations are
counted as a single client198 and a hedge fund that has fifteen or
fewer clients may qualify the hedge fund manager to remain exempt
from registration as a CTA.199 If a fund manager qualifies for the
“families and friends” program, he or she will be able to trade
options and futures for 15 individuals who will not have to qualify as
sophisticated or qualified investors. This helps to circumvent
accredited investor standards and allow retail investors into hedge
funds.
C. Market Segmentation
194 See Commodities Futures Trading Comm’n, No. 98-18, COMM. FUT. L.
REP. P 27,276, 1998 WL 141550.
195 Commodity Exchange Act, 7 U.S.C. § 1a(5) (2000).
196 Id. § 1a(6)(A). See Commodities Futures Trading Comm’n, No. 98-18,
supra note 194.
197 Id. § 6m(1); 17 C.F.R. § 4.14(a)(10) (2008).
198 17 C.F.R. § 4.14(a)(10) (2008).
199 7 U.S.C. § 6m(1) (2006) (sometimes labeled "family and friends
programs").
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
According to IBIS World, five percent of all investors in the
hedge fund market are retail investors.200 Five percent is a significant
number. Most notably, the report distinguishes retail investors as any
investors who are not institutional investors or high net worth
individuals. The proportion of the five percent investing in hedge
funds would probably have to be discounted because retail investors
tend to be heavily represented in exchange traded funds.201
Even though the expected revenue and revenue growth rates
were under increasing pressure in 2008,202 the long-term forecasts by
IBISWorld indicate that the industry will grow at an average annual
rate of 26.1 percent during the five-year period through 2013.203
These assumptions would probably have to be adjusted given recent
reports that redemptions and investment declines are likely to cause
hedge fund assets to fall, by mid-2009, as much as 50 percent from
their peak.204
Given the forecast, it seems unlikely that the market
segmentation would substantially change in the coming years.
Increasing competition among hedge funds and new low-cost
vehicles that track the performance of hedge funds across a range of
asset classes205 could result in pressure on the fee structure of hedge
funds. Moreover, the depreciating performance of hedge funds has
and will continue to precipitate redemptions by investors.206
Redemptions, in turn, will result in smaller numbers of investors who
are willing to leave their funds with hedge funds or commit new
funds. The smaller pool of investors would probably have to be
shared by more hedge funds and hedge fund like vehicles. Some
funds would probably not be able to compete based on performance
and fees. In attempting to compete with their peers, such funds would
probably be tempted to find ways to open up to retail investors on an
increasing scale.
200 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 9 (referencing
graph).
201 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 10.
202 Id. at 6 (referencing graphs).
203 Id. at 38 (referencing graphs).
204 Strasburg et al, supra note 24.
205 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 39.
206 Strasburg et al, supra note 24 (“Redemptions in the industry will amount
to between 25 percent and 40 percent of hedge-fund assets by March 2009,
says Barry Colvin, vice chairman of Balyasny Asset Management, a New
York hedge fund . . .”).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Accordingly, if the segmentation of the industry stays
constant while the industry grows at an average annual rate of 26.1
percent during the five-year period to 2013, the industry can expect a
correlated growth rate for retail investors. At the same time,
increasing competition in the industry could precipitate action to
open hedge funds to retail investors.
V. Market Failure and Inequities
Events in world financial markets and certain financial
instruments such as CDOs could raise concerns over market failure
in financial instruments. Concerns over market failure of highly
complex financial products are closely related to valuation problems
in hedge funds as complex financial products are frequently used by
hedge funds and are difficult to value. Legislators and regulators
could use market failure to legitimize attempts to impose stricter
rules on hedge funds.
A. Moral Hazard and Market Failure in Complex
Financial Instruments
Scholars have long debated the theory of market failure.207
Keynesian economist Paul A. Samuelson, along with others, defined
the phenomenon of market failure and formalized it.208 Other
scholars later opined that Samuelson’s arguments were, in many
207 For a thorough discussion of the theory of market failure and most of the
arguments pro and contra, see, e.g., DAVID L. WEIMER & AIDAN R. VINING,
POLICY ANALYSIS: CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE, (2nd ed. 1992); PAUL A.
SAMUELSON , ECONOMICS: AN INTRODUCTORY ANALYSIS, (6th ed. 1964);
Louis De Alessi, Error and Bias in Benefit-Cost Analysis: HUD’s Case for
the Wind Rule, 16 CATO J. 129 (1996); Steven N. S. Cheung, The Fable of
the Bees: An Economic Investigation, 16 J. L. & ECON. 11 (1973); Ronald
H. Coase, The Lighthouse in Economics, 17 J. L. & ECON. 357 (1974);
Joseph Farrell, Information and the Coase Theorem,1 J. ECON.
PERSPECTIVES 113 (1987); J. E. Meade, External Economies and
Diseconomies in a Competitive Situation, 62 ECON. J. 54 (1952); Richard
Nelson, Roles of Government in a Mixed Economy, 6 J. POLICY ANALYSIS
AND MGMT. 541 (1987); DOUGLASS C. NORTH & ROBERT P. THOMAS, THE
RISE OF THE WESTERN WORLD: A NEW ECONOMIC HISTORY (1973); Charles
Wolf, A Theory of Nonmarket Failure: Framework for Implementation
Analysis, 22 J. L. & ECON. 107 (1979).
208 See Samuelson, supra note 207.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
respects, fallacious.209 In some cases, markets would be inefficient
because agreements within the market were not enforced.210 Perhaps
today, market inefficiencies are not the direct result of any inherent
failures but could be the result of the neglect to set up an institutional
framework. In 2007, the market experienced record downgrades in
mortgage-backed securities. CDOs, and other complex debt
securities, fueled unprecedented bank write-downs. Some AAA rated
debt lost all its value.211 January 2008 was the worst month for CDOs
in more than 10 years with issuance of CDOs grinding to a near halt
worldwide.212 The value of the CDO market had previously been
estimated at more than $2 trillion. As the value of CDOs fell, the
market for them disappeared.213
1. Hierarchies in Financial Institutions
In the case of complex financial products and derivatives,
market participants engaged in executing transactions in products are
predominantly mid- to lower-level employees of banks or traders for
hedge funds and other large institutions beholden to the desires of
their employers. As such, these market participants are agents of their
firms. Moral hazard214 becomes a real problem in the forms of (i)
209 See e.g. THE THEORY OF MARKET FAILURE—A CRITICAL EXAMINATION
(Tyler Cowen ed., 1988) (compiling a collection of primary critiques of
market-failure theory with suggestions on further research, contributors
include James M. Buchanan, Robert J. Smith, Robert Axelrod, Earl R.
Brubaker, Steven N. S. Cheung, Harold Demsetz, Jerome Ellig, Kenneth D.
Goldin, and Jack High).
210 See e.g. North & Thomas, supra note 207 at 8 (stating that
“[g]overnments take over the protection and enforcement of property rights
because they can do so at lower cost than private volunteer groups . . . .”).
211 John Shenn, CDO Market is Almost Frozen, JP Morgan, Merrill Say,
BLOOMBERG.COM, Feb. 5, 2008, http://www.bloomberg.com/apps/news?
pid=20601087&sid=aCk0Qr1f2Eew&refer=home (“The slowdown of the
more than $2 trillion CDO market follows record downgrades in mortgage-
linked securities last year. Some AAA rated debt lost all its value . . .”).
212 Paul J. Davies, Trading in CDOs Slows to a Trickle, FINANCIAL
TIMES.COM, Feb. 11, 2008, http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/39f3e128-d808-
11dc-98f7-0000779fd2ac.html?nclick_check=1.
213 IBISWORLD U.S. INDUSTRY REPORT, supra note 14, at 31.
214 Organisation for Economic Cooperation & Development Glossary of
Statistical Terms—Moral Hazard, http://stats.oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?
ID=1689 (last visited Apr. 7, 2009).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
hidden action, i.e. the actions of the agents are unobservable by the
principal, and (ii) hidden information, i.e. the agent has information
that the principal has not. As for hidden action, the investment
activities of individual traders and managers are not directly
observable by the individuals and institutions whose economic assets
are utilized for these trades. Even if the institutions would be able to
put monitoring measures into place, the activities of individual
traders would probably not be directly controllable. Hidden
information is also an issue in this context because the traders in
most cases will have more market information and knowledge than
their supervisors and clients. This is mostly due to the nature of
trading information and the expertise that a trader in specialized
instruments or markets will develop over the course of his or her
career.
The principal-agent problem is further exacerbated by
hierarchies in financial institutions that often create multiple layers of
agency relationships to trade and invest in complex financial
products. In these layers, the agents who are using complex financial
products to invest a principal's funds are often removed by several
levels from the principals who are bearing the real economic risk of a
transaction. The moral hazard problem is further exacerbated when
the financial products involved in many of these transactions are so
highly complex that the agents, mostly on the buy side, do not
entirely understand them and trade for the principal based on
incomplete and asymmetric information. The use of these
instruments is often based on the agent's assumption as to what other
market participants may be doing the next day or the day thereafter
and often leaves little consideration for the real or underlying value
of such instruments.
2. Moral Hazard of Rating Agencies
The buyer of CDOs may rely heavily on the rating
agencies—possibly creating another level of agency problems.
Rating agencies are uniquely active in the CDO market215 but have
215 See Frank Partnoy, How and Why Credit Rating Agencies are Not Like
Other Gatekeepers, in FINANCIAL GATEKEEPERS: CAN THEY PROTECT
INVESTORS? 59, 62 (Yasuyuki Fuchita & Robert E. Litan eds., 2006),
(“Credit rating agencies are more profitable than other gatekeepers, they
face different and potentially more serious conflicts of interest, and they
are uniquely active in structured finance, particularly with regard to
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
serious deficiencies in policies and procedures for rating CDOs and
other structured products tied to subprime mortgages.216 Rating
agencies are paid for their ratings by the issuer of a CDO217 but since
the major users of such ratings are the buyers of CDOs, conflicts of
interests arise.218 The rating agency as the agent would probably have
an incentive to issue high ratings to satisfy the issuer of a CDO as its
principal. The buyer as the beneficiary of the rating has no means of
controlling the rating agencies and its ratings other than through its
relationship with the issuer. The issuer principal has incentives to
control the rating agency agent in the hope that the buyer will
continue to rely on the ratings from the rating agency. It seems
unlikely that the issuer-buyer relationship and the incentives inherent
within could adequately control the principal-agent relationship
between issuer and rating agency to ensure accurate ratings. As the
incentive structures are not directly aligned with the beneficiary of
the ratings, the beneficiary is not able to monitor the rating agency
adequately. The problem is exacerbated when considering that the
increasing number and complexities of CDOs often lead to
information asymmetries for rating agency employees who
collateralized debt obligations.").
216 SEC. AND EXCH. COMM'N, SUMMARY REPORT OF ISSUES IDENTIFIED IN
THE COMMISSION STAFF’S EXAMINATIONS OF SELECT CREDIT RATING
AGENCIES 1-2 (2008), http://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2008/craexaminat
ion070808.pdf [hereinafter SEC CREDIT AGENCY REPORT] (“[T]he Staff’s
examinations revealed that: there was a substantial increase in the number
and in the complexity of RMBS and CDO deals since 2002, and some of the
rating agencies appear to have struggled with the growth; significant aspects
of the ratings process were not always disclosed; policies and procedures for
rating RMBS and CDOs can be better documented; the rating agencies are
implementing new practices with respect to the information provided to
them; the rating agencies did not always document significant steps in the
ratings process - including the rationale for deviations from their models
and for rating committee actions and decisions—and they did not always
document significant participants in the ratings process; the surveillance
processes used by the rating agencies appear to have been less robust than
the processes used for initial ratings; issues were identified in the
management of conflicts of interest and improvements can be made; and the
rating agencies’ internal audit processes varied significantly.”).
217 Id. at 23. This is the so-called “Issuer-Pays” conflict. (“Each of the
NRSROs examined uses the “issuer pays” model, in which the arranger or
other entity that issues the security is also seeking the rating, and pays the
rating agency for the rating.”).
218 Id.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
reportedly struggled with the complexities.219 Given the complexities
of CDOs and the increase in deal volumes, one would have expected
higher transactions costs. In fact, not all rating agencies experienced
higher transaction cost through hiring additional personnel to match
their respective percentage increases in CDO deal volume.220 The
lack of correlation between CDO deal volume and revenues for
rating agencies from providing CDO ratings221 and the
disproportionate increase in staff levels222 at least raises monitoring
questions for the buyers of CDOs who rely on the ratings provided
by the agencies.
Rating agencies seem to be struggling with a host of other
issues that they will probably need to address in the near future, such
as a lack of disclosure about the ratings process for CDOs,
substandard documentation of ratings policies and procedures,
insufficient documentation regarding the rationale for deviating from
models to adjust ratings, and lagging surveillance processes in
updating ratings.223
The SEC has proposed new rules to address the concerns.224
The rules require, among other provisions, that rating agencies keep
records of all actions related to a current rating, and maintain a
record of the rationale for any material difference between the rating
implied by a quantitative model and the rating that the agency
actually issued.225 Their record-keeping obligation will also extend to
any complaints with respect to the performance of a credit analyst in
providing a credit rating.226 The agencies are also required to provide
transition statistics for each asset class of credit ratings for which
they are registered or seeking registration.227 In performing the credit
219 Id. at 12. (“Internal documents at two of the rating agencies appear to
reflect struggles to adapt to the increase in the volume and complexity of the
deals.”).
220 Id. at 10. (reporting that for the most part, rating agencies’ increases in
staffing correlated with deal volume. However, with respect to CDOs, “two
rating agencies’ staffing increases did not appear to math their percentage
increases in deal volume.”).
221 Id. at 11.
222 Id.
223 Id. at 1.
224 See SEC Adopts New Rules for Credit Rating Agencies, Re-Proposes
Others, Fed. Sec. L. Rep. (CCH), Letter No. 2356 (Dec. 10, 2008).
225 Id.
226 Id.
227 Id.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
ratings, the rating agencies will also have to disclose how much they
relied on verification performed on assets underlying or referenced
by a structured finance transaction.228 It is unclear if these new SEC
rules will suffice to comprehensively address the disclosure and
documentation issues.
The combination of various layers of principal-agent
relationships, bounded rationality, moral hazard and incomplete and
asymmetric allocation of information could have resulted in market
failure for complex financial instruments. Financial regulators may
use this as justification to regulate complex financial instruments and
other hard-to-value assets and perhaps may feel the need to go
beyond that. It remains unclear if such regulation would produce
results superior to private ordering.
B. Informal Rules Protect Primarily Qualified
Investors
Valuation of hedge funds is important for both qualified
investors and retail investors as the NAV of positions held by a
hedge fund is used as the basis for all of the hedge fund’s
subscriptions, redemptions and performance calculations.
Performance calculations based on the NAV are used to advertise the
fund and charge performance and other fees to the investors. When
faced with performance calculations as well as subscriptions and
redemption prices, the interests of qualified and retail investors are
mostly aligned. Qualified and retail investors generally both seek to
get the best and most accurate price when they subscribe to a fund or
when they redeem their shares or pay performance fees to
management. Especially when paying performance fees of up to 30
percent of profits, investors expect the fund to get the NAV and the
performance calculations right. However, some crucial differences
distinguish the interests and incentives of qualified and retail
investors. More specifically, qualified investors can rely on a set of
informal rules and business practices that are not available to retail
investors.
Qualified investors tend to have some form of industry
knowledge or relationships with people in the industry and they often
willingly accept and anticipate the valuation problem. Their
emphasis tends to be on a long-term investment that is based on
228 Id.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
mutual trust and, in most cases, a pre-existing relationship or
knowledge of the manager and the manager’s reputation in the
community. Qualified investors often have a closer relationship with
the management of hedge funds due to their industry involvement
and other business relationships.229 Even though their preference may
be to obtain accurate valuation when needed, they have strong
incentives to accept valuation problems in order to maintain the
relationships with management and other industry participants and
protect their reputations. Managers are also dependent on their
reputations in the marketplace and have strong incentives to protect
their performance records. Even though managers may not be able to
value their units accurately and may have incentives to misprice the
units, they may ignore valuation problems and may give a qualified
investor a better price or another form of compensation to maintain
the relationship and their reputation and the reputation of the fund.
Accordingly, the interests of managers and qualified investors are
somewhat correlated and qualified investors are less likely to raise
valuation issues or sue the hedge fund and its management. Even if
things do go wrong, qualified investors may attempt to maintain the
relationship in order to negotiate favorable terms. Given their role in
the industry, and the industry practices and informal rules that protect
their relationships and investments, qualified investors may not
desire nor require extended investor protection rules to optimize
valuation of hedge funds.
In contrast, retail investors often have little appreciation for
or knowledge of potential valuation problems. In most cases, they
have not been previously exposed to or involved in the industry and
they may not be part of a network of contacts and informal references
that would allow them to get involved. They also do not normally
have the financial means to hire professionals to refer them and then
assist them in the decision making process. Unlike the qualified
investor, the retail investor would probably not have been referred to
229 If the investment should not be based on a pre-existing relationship,
qualified investors mostly have the foresight and financial means to hire
professionals to assist in the decision making process that leads to an
investment. The fund, in turn, hires professionals to draft the pertinent
documentation and review the accounts for the fund. These professionals
may get involved in the solicitation process, they may refer other industry
participants who they had previously worked with or who are part of their
larger network of contacts. Often they may be in a position to introduce the
investors to the management of the fund.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
the fund through a mutual acquaintance, an attorney or other business
relationship, but rather would probably have read about it in the
media230 or would have relied otherwise on publicly available
information. Accordingly, the retail investor probably would not be
able to rely on an existing relationship, and therefore the good faith
treatment and the set of informal rules that come with it. Retail
investors also do not have incentives to accept valuation problems to
maintain relationships with management and other industry
participants. Their arms length and impersonal relationships with
management disincentivizes informal arrangements. Business
practices and informal rules of the industry may not apply to
management’s dealings with retail investors. Accordingly, retail
investors may not have the benefit of informal compensation for
valuation inaccuracies. Retail investors are also less likely to care
about their reputation in the industry or the relationship with the
hedge fund’s management but will rather focus on the financial
return of their investments and any impact that valuation inaccuracies
may have thereon. Their incentives are, thus, not aligned with
management, and retail investors are more likely to raise valuation
issues or sue a hedge fund and its management for valuation
inaccuracies. Given their minority position in the industry and the
lack of informal rules and management’s disincentives to protect
their investments, retail investors are more likely to benefit from
investor protection rules that optimize valuation of hedge funds.
VI. Regulatory Options and Potential Alternative
Recent developments in world markets, the housing and
credit crisis and its repercussions in the U.S. economy and financial
markets could make it more likely for the U.S. and other legislators
to attempt to regulate the markets and the economy. There could be
many reasons for new and enhanced regulation in the current
environment231 even though the role of regulation in the economy
and financial markets and the effect of regulation remain unclear.
230 Many magazines for medical professionals have started to publicize
hedge fund investments. See, e.g., John J. Grande, Alternative Investment
Strategies Can offer Significant ROI OPHTHALMOLOGY TIMES, May 15,
2002; Leslie Kane, Where to Put Your Money: Four Experts Tell Whether
You Should put Your Money, MED. ECON., Jan. 9, 2004, at 48.
231 See supra Part V.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Hedge funds are major players in international financial
markets and disproportionately utilize hard-to-value assets and
complex financial instruments, both of which could be primary
targets of any regulatory efforts. Legislators and financial regulators
could attempt to regulate the complex financial products that have
been involved in recent events. Hedge funds could then adjust their
market exposure and strategies to such new regulations. Regulators
and legislatures could also attempt to regulate hedge funds directly.
It is unclear if any one form of regulation would
substantively be able to address the concerns over valuation of hedge
funds. A focus on hard-to-value assets and complex financial
products alone would probably ignore other causes. The problem is
exacerbated if a regulator or legislator were to consider the role of
retailization and the different levels of protection and incentive
structures for retail and qualified investors. The effect of a
hypothetical regulatory attempt on the industry and individual
industry participants would be mostly unclear.
This paper has proposed the following combination of causes
for the valuation problem: (i) the convergence of hedge funds and
private equity funds, (ii) the fee structure of hedge funds (iii) the
conflicts of interest of hedge fund managers who manage and value
their portfolios, (iv) the valuation of complex futures, options,
structured credits and over-the-counter derivatives, as well as (v)
transparency. The paper has also demonstrated that retailization is a
phenomenon that could change the hedge fund industry and creates
different levels of protection and incentive structures for qualified
and retail investors. Legislators and financial regulators intending to
address concerns over valuation could be well advised to consider the
impact of retailization and the different levels of protection for
qualified and retail investors as well as the lack of understanding and
knowledge of both retail and qualified investors when it comes to
certain asset classes.
Regulators and legislators would probably have several
options to address the issues around complex financial instruments
and valuation concerns in hedge funds, including but not limited to
(i) limiting the use of hard-to-value assets and complex financial
products, (ii) implementing investor qualification requirements for
hedge fund investments, (iii) setting standards for valuation and risk
disclosure, (iv) correlating investor suitability with hedge fund risk
exposure, (v) setting guidelines wherein the level of retail investors
would trigger asset allocation (vi) implementing investor suitability
standards for certain asset classes. Many of these and other
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
theoretically possible avenues of regulation would probably infringe
on the interests of market participants who may not need protection
through regulation. Investor suitability standards seem the most
preferable to this author because they would probably protect the
interests of retail investors while at the same time not unduly
burdening the hedge fund industry and other market participants.
A. Limitation on the Use of Hard-to-Value Assets
and Financial Products
Regulators could be inclined to argue that market failure in
financial instruments precipitated systemic risk. Hedge funds, as the
primary users of complex financial instruments, could then be the
first to encounter new regulatory requirements such as a limitation on
the use of highly complex financial products and hard-to-value
assets. It is very unlikely that limiting the use of financial
instruments will have positive effects. The implicit inhibition of
financial innovation would probably limit investors' use of hedging
products and interfere with economic expansion.232 Many of the
markets where a limitation on the use of financial products could
have avoided financial losses will most likely disappear. A prime
example is the market for CDOs.233 Further limitation on the use of
such instruments would probably be unadvisable. A better approach
would be to require hedge funds to demonstrate their knowledge and
understanding of the products they utilize and to require disclosure to
investors.
B. Investor Qualification Requirements for
Investments in Hedge Funds
232 Thomas Garbaravicius & Frank Dierick, Hedge Funds and their
Implications for Financial Stability ECB, OCCASIONAL PAPER NO. 34
(2005), available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=75209; c.f. Heinz
Zimmermann, Credit Risk Transfer, Hedge Funds, and the Supply of
Liquidity, U. OF ST. GALLEN LAW & ECONOMICS WORKING PAPER NO.
2008-14 (2007), available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=1137924
(concluding that ”the role of hedge funds in providing ‘liquidity’ is
questionable.”).
233 See Davies, supra note 212.(“The market for complex debt securities has
seen its worst start to the year in more than 10 years with issuance of
collateralised debt obligations grinding to a near halt worldwide.”).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Another avenue of regulation could be to increase the
sophistication test to disqualify retail investors for certain hedge fund
investments. Regulation D provides a safe harbor under Section 4(2)
of the Securities Act of 1933 and defines “accredited investor” as a
person with a net worth of more than one million dollars or an annual
income of more than $200,000 for an individual or $300,000 for a
married couple.234 Inflation may have eroded the significance of a
one million dollar net worth as a proxy for investor sophistication
under Regulation D. To strengthen the safe harbor numerical
standards for hedge fund investors, the SEC has proposed
amendments to Regulation D.235
It would perhaps be difficult to determine at what level of
wealth "sophistication" of investors could be assumed. Unless the
business of an investor is to primarily invest in certain hard-to-value
assets, the sophistication of such investor can probably not be
assumed, regardless of personal wealth. Investors who could
otherwise afford to hire professionals to help in the decision making
process, for a variety of reasons, do not always do that. Accordingly,
raising the numerical tests by adding an investable assets
requirement236 would probably not address the question of how the
lack of understanding of certain hard-to-value assets could be
addressed. A compromise could be a requirement for increasing the
numerical test under Regulation D in combination with a requirement
that the seller has a reasonable belief that the buyer understands
hedge fund investments.
C. Valuation and Risk Disclosure
234 17 C.F.R. § 230.501(a)(5) (2008).
235 SEC Proposed Rules, supra note 144, at 409 (pointing out that many
individual investors today may be eligible as accredited investors that, in the
past, would not have reached such qualifications. As private pools have
become more complex with limited information investors “may find it
difficult to appreciate the unique risks of these pools, including those with
respect to undisclosed conflicts of interest, complex fee structures and the
higher risk that may accompany such pools' anticipated returns.”); see also
Testimony of David Ruder, supra note 56, at n.8 (“ The SEC has proposed
amendments to Regulation D strengthening the safe harbor numerical
standards for hedge fund investors, but has not yet adopted the amendments.
Rel. 33-8766 (Dec 27, 2006) and Rel. 33-8828 (Aug 3, 2007).”).
236 SEC Proposed Rules, supra note 144, at 405.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
Transparency has many benefits and could alleviate some of
the concerns over valuation and risk assessment. Disclosure of
valuation and risk to the SEC would perhaps minimize incomplete
information and information asymmetries. More disclosure may not,
however, always mean better governance if the information provided
is hard to assess and evaluate. In the case of reporting hedge fund
risk data to the SEC, it remains unclear if the SEC would be able to
adequately process the data to make recommendations or rules that
would limit the risk exposure of the respective hedge fund and thus
limit systemic risk. A serious obstacle would perhaps be the
availability of qualified staff to assess the risk data from hedge funds
and make appropriate recommendations. In many cases,
understanding and processing the risk data would most likely require
an understanding of hard-to-value assets and highly complex
financial instruments. Professionals who could understand the risk
data would probably be disincentivized to use their knowledge for
purposes of supervision rather than economic gain. Knowledgeable
risk analysts may find the private sector much more lucrative than
the public sector.
In addition to the utilization problem, if the SEC should
require hedge funds to provide risk and valuation data in a certain
simplified format, the SEC would in fact impose a significant burden
on the hedge fund industry. It is unclear if it would be possible to
limit the level of complexity of valuation and risk data. Either way,
providing risk and valuation data would probably impose significant
transaction costs on hedge funds as it would probably require pre-
screening of the data. It could also mean that hedge funds would
need to hire additional staff to prepare the data. Transaction costs
would probably further increase if the SEC would add simplification
requirements for risk and valuation data. Hedge fund managers
would need to spend time and resources to provide simplified data.
Given the complexities of valuation analysis, it remains unclear if
hedge fund managers can always ascertain the value of their
positions. This, in turn, raises questions regarding the quality of the
risk and valuation data that would be provided to the SEC.
D. Correlating Investor Suitability with Hedge Fund
Risk Exposure
Depending on future developments in the industry, the SEC
would perhaps be able to create investor suitability criteria and
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
correlate them with the risk exposure of hedge funds, i.e. the more
sophisticated the investors of a hedge fund, the more risk would be
allowed for the fund. In this scenario, the fund management would
disclose to the SEC who is investing in the hedge fund, thus allowing
the SEC to evaluate the sophistication of the investors in the fund.
Based on the average level of sophistication, the SEC could
determine what level of risk could be appropriate for such fund and
what kind of financial instruments would be appropriate for the
respective level of risk. By controlling who is accepted as an investor
in the fund, management could control what requirements will be
imposed by the SEC in terms of what financial instruments can be
used or should not be used. Allowing the SEC to determine what
level of risk a fund may take depending on its average investor
profile would probably enable the SEC to control risk taking.
A big downside to this approach would most certainly be the
transaction and administrative costs that would be involved with such
a proposal. It would probably also lead to only ultra-sophisticated
institutional investors being able to invest in hedge funds that would
have access to hard-to value assets and complex financial
instruments. Focusing on the level of retail investors could be one
triggering event but would perhaps not have to remain the only
criterion.
E. Level of Retail Investors Triggering Asset
Allocation
Alternatively, limiting complex financial instruments in
portfolios of hedge funds open to retail investors, if commitments
from retail investors exceed some level of assets under management,
would likely protect the interests of retail investors while at the same
time limiting undue burdens for the industry.237 By requiring hedge
funds to limit their risk exposure and the use of hard-to-value assets
and complex financial products upon certain triggering events, the
SEC would probably be able to avoid a highly complex and costly
237 Managers would be incentivized to keep the assets from retail investors
under the applicable retail investor asset threshold. Therefore, they would
keep the fund in the current regulatory scheme without implementing
additional protection for retail investors. Arguably, this would at least make
the managers more aware of special rules for retail investors and possibly
impact their risk-taking.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
assessment of hedge fund risk and valuation data.238 Actually, the
entire problem of hedge fund valuation and the demand for increased
transparency and valuation accuracy could probably be avoided, as
the SEC would simply monitor the triggering of certain thresholds.
However, such supervision would require substantial resources and
would create transaction costs. Retail investors may need the
additional protection because they are not protected under informal
rules, as are qualified investors. This option would not curtail the use
of hard-to-value assets and complex financial products per se but
would merely limit the use of such assets and products if and when
retail investors are involved at a threshold level of, for example, 20
percent of assets under management. Accordingly, asset managers
could avoid any regulatory limitations by simply staying below the
threshold level. This form of regulation for the retail investors would
protect those that are most in need of protection while at the same
time would curtail regulatory infringement on other market
participants and their interests. The approach could help to avoid
burdening the industry and individual market participants.
There are downsides to this approach. Even if it is someday
possible to show with data that retail investors do have access to
hedge funds,239 it remains unclear what level of retailization would
justify using a regulatory approach that protects retail investors. It
seems more likely that the current regulatory scheme that
distinguishes between retail and qualified investors would be
amended to cover all hedge fund investors.
The approach would probably also fail to appropriately
recognize that not only retail investors lack the necessary
understanding of certain complex financial products and hard-to-
value assets.240 Incomplete and asymmetric information, bounded
rationality of decision makers and moral hazard make it difficult for
professional and semi professional investors to discern the different
characteristics of many highly complex financial instruments and
hard-to-value assets. Lastly, using a trigger level of retail investors as
a percentage of NAV of a hedge fund would likely result in hedge
238 For a short summary on assessing hedge fund valuation and risk data, see
supra Part II.
239 See infra note 253.
240 Mark Whitehouse & Serena Ng, Insurance Deals Spread Pain Of U.S.
Defaults World-Wide, WALL ST. J., Dec. 23, 2008, at A1 (explaining that
"many public-sector and nonprofit organizations that invested in synthetic
CDOs didn't understand the risks they were taking on.").
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
fund managers attempting to avoid the triggering event and keep
retail investors below the trigger level of NAV, thus exposing retail
investors in such a fund to potentially increased levels of risk.
F. Investor Suitability Standards for Certain Asset
Classes
Sophisticated investors and retail investors encounter
information asymmetries and limited information on certain products
and probably cannot always appropriately assess the sophisticated
financial instruments that they use or invest in.241 This paper has
mostly focused on retail investors and the additional forms of
regulation that could help to protect them. Separating rules for retail
investors and rules for qualified investors and management could
potentially produce suboptimal results. Qualified investors would
then probably have as much of an assessment and valuation problem
with certain complex financial instruments and hard-to-value assets
as would otherwise unqualified investors. This issue would arise if,
for example, a qualified pension fund were managed by the pension
fund’s own members who were not financial professionals.242
Prudent qualified investors would probably be expected to hire
professionals to help with the decision making process in an
environment of incomplete information. In the real world of bounded
rationality of decision makers who may act based on incomplete and
asymmetric information, however, decisions are often made without
an assessment or an approximation of the extent of potential risk
exposure.243
1. Existing Suitability Standards
Investor suitability requirements could help ascertain
whether potential investors in certain financial instruments and hard-
to-value assets have an understanding of the risks and benefits of
such instruments before making an investment decision. The
241 See supra Part V.A.2 (elaborating on Moral Hazard of Rating Agencies).
242 This hypothetical also makes the point that it is not only retail investors
who would not understand these complex financial instruments. This, in
turn, strengthens the argument for implementation of investor suitability
standards that would cover qualified investors and retail investors.
243 See supra Part V.A (Moral Hazard and Market Failure in Complex
Financial Instruments).
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
National Association of Securities Dealers ("NASD"), 244 (now
FINRA) promulgated rules that require customer specific suitability,
i.e., a broker-dealer had to reasonably believe that its
recommendations to invest in a hedge fund or hedge fund product
would be suitable for the particular investors the broker-dealer
advised.245 To determine suitability, the broker-dealer is required to
examine the investor's financial- and tax status, his or her investment
objectives and other relevant information.246 Interestingly,
satisfaction of the accredited investor requirements under Regulation
D of the Securities Act, alone, does not satisfy the NASD's suitability
requirements. FINRA Interpretive Guidance for Suitability
Obligations to Institutional Customers helps to identify the suitability
of certain financial products for a particular institutional customer
under NASD Rule 2310(a).247 Core factors include the investor’s, or
244 In 2007 the National Association of Stock Dealers (NASD) merged with
the New York Stock Exchange's regulation committee to form FINRA.
Existing NASD rules are still valid and enforceable by NASD's successor
FINRA.
245 FINRA, Inc., Rule 2310(a), Recommendations to Customers (Suitability)
(2007), available at http://finra.complinet.com/en/display/display_viewall.
html?rbid=2403&element_id=3638&record_id=4315.
246 Rule 2310(b), id.
247 FINRA, Inc., Guidance to Rule 2310(a) (2007), available at
http://finra.complinet.com/en/display/display_main.html?rbid=2403&eleme
nt_id=3641. See also INV. DEALER ASS'N OF CANADA, Policy No. 4 -
Minimum Standards for Institutional Account Opening, Operation and
Supervision, 28 O.S.C.B. 1747, 1748 (2005), available at
http://www.osc.gov.on.ca/MarketRegulation/SRO/ida/rr/srr-ida_20050211_
policy-no4.pdf (“The suitability provisions in the Policy were based, in part,
on NASD Interpretation IM-2310-3 entitled Suitability Obligations to
Institutional Customers. Under the NASD interpretation, once a member has
reasonable grounds for concluding that the institutional customer is making
independent investment decisions and is capable of independently
evaluating investment risk (based on enumerated factors), then a member’s
obligation to determine that a recommendation is suitable for a particular
customer is fulfilled. Both revised Policy No. 4 and the NASD Rule
recognize that these factors are guidelines only and a determination must be
made on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration the factors and
circumstances of a particular Member-customer relationship. In the United
Kingdom, the [FSA] has suitability requirements only for private customers.
The private customer definition parallels the definition of retail customers in
Canada. When the customer is an intermediate or market counterparty,
similar to an institutional customer in Canada, then the adviser is
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
its agent’s, ability to evaluate the inherent investment risk, including
the resources available to the investors to make informed
decisions.248 Factors in the investor suitability determination include
(i) the investor's capability to evaluate investment risk
independently249 and (ii) the investor ability to make independent
investment decisions. 250
2. Instituting General Investor Suitability
Requirements
Instituting general investor suitability requirements could
potentially address many of the concerns identified earlier without
imposing harsh requirements or rules that would otherwise unduly
burden the industry. Perhaps these requirements for investor
suitability could provide a general framework for buyers and sellers
in the market for certain complex and hard-to-value financial
products. Such requirements could follow existing FINRA standards
for investor suitability for certain financial products but would
probably need to be distinguished in certain respects.251 The
specifically exempt from suitability requirements.”).
248 FINRA, Inc., Guidance to Rule 2310(a), supra note 247.
249 Id. (adding factors such as: "[(i)] the use of one or more consultants,
investment advisers or bank trust departments; [(ii)] the general level of
experience of the institutional customer in financial markets and specific
experience with the type of instruments under consideration; [(iii)] the
customer's ability to understand the economic features of the security
involved; [(iv)] the customer's ability to independently evaluate how market
developments would affect the security; and [(v)] the complexity of the
security or securities involved").
250 Id. (adding factors such as: "[(i)] any written or oral understanding that
exists between the member and the customer regarding the nature of the
relationship between the member and the customer and the services to be
rendered by the member; [(ii)] the presence or absence of a pattern of
acceptance of the member's recommendations; [(iii)] the use by the
customer of ideas, suggestions, market views and information obtained from
other members or market professionals, particularly those relating to the
same type of securities; and [(iv)] the extent to which the member has
received from the customer current comprehensive portfolio information in
connection with discussing recommended transactions or has not been
provided important information regarding its portfolio or investment
objectives").
251 Id. (stating that "[w]hile this interpretation is potentially applicable to
any institutional customer, the guidance contained herein is more
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
requirements could apply to any investor in certain complex financial
instruments and hard-to-value assets. They would probably
encapsulate all hedge fund investors including both qualified and
retail investors. The requirements would probably help to address the
lack of sophistication of investors who previously qualified as
“sophisticated” but were, in fact, not able to appropriately assess the
risk of their investment.252 Such requirements could, in turn, give
retail investors who previously did not qualify for hedge fund
investments another opportunity to show their understanding of
financial instruments without necessarily requiring a certain level of
wealth to qualify. A general requirement, for example, could be that
the buyer would need to understand the general category of products
and the specific complex product that the buyer is considering for
investment. The seller of such instruments could probably be
required to have a reasonable expectation that the buyer has
experience in such complex financial instruments and hard-to-value
assets.
VII. Conclusion253
Recent developments in world markets, the credit and
housing crisis and its repercussions in the U.S. and world economies
and financial markets make it more likely that U.S. and other
jurisdictions will attempt to regulate hedge funds and the valuation of
hedge funds as part of a general overhaul of the regulatory systems.
appropriately applied to an institutional customer with at least $10 million
invested in securities in the aggregate in its portfolio and/or under
management").
252 See supra Part VI.B.
253 This article premised on the idea that retailization will play a significant
role in the future. But, currently, retailization cannot be quantified with a
degree of certainty. See supra Part II. It is unclear what role retailization
would play in the future. Any analysis of the phenomenon is currently
relegated to conjecture and attempts to explain potential loopholes. See id.
(discussing Blue Sky laws exemptions and CFTC Rule exemptions). There
is no solid proof for the phenomenon at this time. Using a form of
regulation that is premised on speculation without any proof or form of
validation through data analysis would probably produce inadequate results
and therefore would not be justifiable. (The SEC has not yet raised the
qualification criteria for qualified investors under Regulation D. See supra
Part IV.A.2.). It remains to be seen if future developments will someday
provide sufficient data to quantify retailization.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

Hedge Fund Valuation - Retailization, Regulation and Investor Suitability
The current system of regulation uses wealth of investors as a proxy
for the sophistication of investors. The numerical wealth
requirements that are currently in place to define qualified investors
who are deemed eligible for hedge fund investments do not take into
account that even investors who would otherwise fulfill the
numerical wealth requirements do not always have the adequate level
of knowledge, understanding and sophistication that would be
required for investing in highly complex financial instruments.
Recent proposals by the SEC to toughen the numeracy wealth
requirements for hedge fund investing fail to ascertain the
appropriate level of sophistication and adequate understanding of
highly complex financial instruments.
Investor suitability standards would address these concerns
by requiring independent verification that investors in highly
complex financial products have the capability to evaluate
investment risk independently and are capable of making
independent investment decisions. Such investor suitability standards
would make the criteria of wealth as a proxy for sophistication
redundant. Precise criteria for investor suitability should be drafted in
a concerted effort of regulators and the investing community.
EElleeccttrroonniicc ccooppyy aavvaaiillaabbllee aatt:: hhttttppss::////ssssrrnn..ccoomm//aabbssttrraacctt==11442288338877

