HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION -
FROM FACTS TO DATA
BY
WULF A. KAAL *
AND
ERIK P.M. VERMEULEN **
* Associate Professor, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis), United States of America.
The authors would like to thank the participants at the 2015 Annual Meeting of the Midwestern Law and
Economics Association (MLEA), the participants at the 2016 First Conference on Empirical Legal Studies
in Europe (CELSE), the participants at the 2016 National Business Law Scholars Conference (NBLSC),
and the participants at the18th Biennial Conference of International Academy of Commercial & Consumer
Law 2016. The authors are also particularly grateful for outstanding support from librarians Nick Farris and
Ann Bateson.
**
Professor of Business & Financial Law, Tilburg Law School - Department of Business Law, Head of
Governance, Philips Lighting, Netherlands.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
ABSTRACT
Disruptive innovation creates increasing regulatory challenges. The reason for this
is simple: Regulation is usually reactive, responding to facts. However, we currently live
in a world of data, not facts. Regulation must therefore be proactive and dynamically
responsive to data and trends. This paper discusses the following questions: (1) Why
should regulators be proactive?, (2) When should regulators respond?, (3) What should
regulators respond to? and (4) How should regulators respond? Using a dataset
comprising over 77,000 venture capital deals with over 35,000 companies in the United
States from 2005 to 2015, the paper shows how investment data can provide important
feedback on innovation trends and associated risks for regulators, optimize the timing of
regulation, and support anticipatory rulemaking.
Keywords: Disruptive Innovation, Venture Capital, Venture Investments, Dynamic
Regulation, Feedback Effects, Optimized Information for Regulation, Anticipatory
Regulation, Big Data
JEL Classification: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................. 4
II. CHARACTERISTICS OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION ............................................................................. 8
III. DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION AS A REGULATORY CHALLENGE ................................................. 14
1. Ex Post Facts-Based (Trial-and-Error) Rulemaking ................................................................. 18
2. Stable and Presumptively Optimal Rules ....................................................................................... 18
3. Timing .......................................................................................................................................................... 19
4. Unknown Future Contingencies ........................................................................................................ 20
IV. DYNAMIC REGULATION AS A REGULATORY SUPPLEMENT .................................................. 22
V. DATA AS INPUT FOR DYNAMIC REGULATION ................................................................................. 25
1. VC Deal Characteristics ....................................................................................................................... 26
2. Industries Represented .......................................................................................................................... 32
VI. VENTURE CAPITAL AS DYNAMIC REGULATION OF DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION .............. 37
VII. CONCLUSION ......................................................................................................................................... 39
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
I. Introduction
Disruptive innovation has shaped and reshaped industries throughout history.
Disruptive innovation can take the form of new business models, new products or
services, or new ways of delivering existing products and services to consumers, while
addressing unmet consumer needs.1 Disruptive innovation is characterized by scientific
discoveries that change existing technological product paradigms and provide the
foundation for more competitive new technologies and products to emerge.2 It is often
associated with the emergence of completely new technologies, new combinations and
applications of existing technologies, and the application of new technologies to specific
societal problem areas, each precipitating a significant paradigm shift for product
technology or creating entirely new paradigms.3 The combination of these factors
facilitates sudden exponential improvements in the value proposition for customers by
enabling discontinuous innovations of processes, products, and services.4 Human-
robot collaboration, constant body monitoring, and driverless cars5 are examples of
disruptive technological innovations that will transform our markets, transport, and health
systems.
Disruptive innovation presents significant regulatory challenges. As disruptive
technologies emerge and grow, they are bound to morph, shift, and merge with other
1 DIRECTORATE FOR FINANCIAL AND ENTERPRISE AFFAIRS COMPETITION COMMITTEE, HEARING ON
DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION (2015), https://goo.gl/3kSCi6.
2 The original “disruptive innovation” terminology came from the famous Bower and Christensen article in
the Harvard Business Review. Joseph L. Bower & Clayton M. Christensen, Disruptive Technologies:
Catching the Wave, HARV. BUS. REV., Jan.-Feb. 1995, at 43, 44 (“The technological changes that damage
established companies are usually not radically new or difficult from a technological point of view. They
do, however, have two important characteristics: First, they typically present a different package of
performance attributes - ones that, at least at the outset, are not valued by existing customers. Second, the
performance attributes that existing customers do value improve at such a rapid rate that the new
technology can later invade those established markets.”). There is no widely accepted definition for
discontinuous and disruptive innovation. However, scholars focus on different aspects, such as industry-
wide product technology factors to the gap between substitutable technological learning curves on a cost or
performance basis, definitions of discontinuous innovation focus on customer behaviour, product
newness, market factors, or a combination of these factors. For an overview of the disruptive innovation
definitions used in the literature, see Ronald N. Kostoff et al., Disruptive Technology Roadmaps, 71 TECH.
FORECASTING & SOCIAL CHANGE 141, 142-44 (2004).
3 Kostoff, supra note 2.
4 See Robert W. Veryzer, Jr., Discontinuous Innovation and the New Product Development Process, 15 J.
PROD. INNOV. MGMT. 304 (1998); Gary S. Lynn et al., Marketing and Discontinuous Innovation: The
Probe and Learn Process, 38 CAL. MGMT. REV. 8 (1996). See also Steven T. Walsh, Roadmapping a
Disruptive Technology: A Case Study, The Emerging Microsystems and Top-Down Nanosystems Industry,
71 TECH. FORECASTING & SOC. CHANGE 161, 165 (2004) (“Two views of disruptive technologies arise
from this literature. One emphasizes the ‘different’ nature of the technology, whereas the other
emphasizes the emerging high technology nature. Bower and Christensen champion the ‘different’ nature
of disruptive technologies emphasizing that they may not be ‘radically new from a technological point of
view’ but have superior ‘performance trajectories’ along critical dimensions that customers value. Abernathy
and Clark and others argue that disruptive technologies’ radical newness or emergent character is an
important element in its definition since robust manufacturing infrastructure is either limited or
nonexistent.”).
5 Gavriel Avigdor & Rene Wintjes, Trend Report: Disruptive Innovations and Forward-Looking Policies
Towards Smart Value Chains 5-7 (European Union, Business Innovation Observatory No. 190, 2015),
http://goo.gl/PUwnwn.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
emerging disruptive trends in constantly accelerating and changing ways. Disruptive
technology convergence can bring with it unexpected and sudden changes in areas that
are already quietly incubating. These new developments and trends are going to
increasingly impact consumer preferences and behavior, products, the financial industry,6
industry practices, delivery channels, and possible regulatory responses to changes in any
of these. The ex-post facts-based and trial-and-error-rulemaking with stable and
presumptively optimal rules7 in the existing regulatory framework8 often produces
suboptimal regulatory outcomes that are no longer sustainable in an environment of
exponential disruptive innovation. While ex-post facts-driven regulation with stable and
presumptively optimal rules in the historically evolved legal infrastructure was
sufficiently able to cope with its inherent collective action problems,9 regulatory cycles,10
trial-and-error rulemaking,11 systemic constraints, and path dependencies, the exponential
6 Chris Brummer, Disruptive Technology and Securities Regulation, 84 FORDHAM L. REV. 977, 977 (2015).
(“This Article explains how technological innovation ‘disrupts’ not only capital markets but also the
exercise of regulatory supervision and oversight. It provides the first theoretical account tracking the
migration of technology across multiple domains of today’s securities infrastructure and argues that an
array of technological innovations are facilitating what can be understood as the disintermediation of the
traditional gatekeepers that regulatory authorities have relied on (and regulated) since the 1930s for
investor protection and market integrity.”).
7 The existing regulatory infrastructure, including Congress, regulatory agencies, self-regulatory bodies, and
the literature on regulation, relies almost exclusively on stable and presumptively optimal rules. Stable and
presumptively optimal rules are created to address perceived regulatory issues identified by lawmakers
through centralized information in the then-existing economic and market conditions. Stable and
presumptively optimal rules, that have sufficient political support at the time of drafting, are tailored and
drafted to attain permanent solutions for perceived regulatory issues. See Wulf A. Kaal, Evolution of Law:
Dynamic Regulation in a New Institutional Economics Framework in FESTSCHRIFT ZU EHREN VON
CHRISTIAN KIRCHNER 1211, 1212 (Wulf A. Kaal, Matthias Schmidt & Andreas Schwartze eds., 2014)
[hereinafter Kaal in FS Kirchner]. (“[T]he institutional infrastructure for rulemaking was geared towards
the creation of rules for governing a relatively stable society with less upward mobility and relatively stable
economic and market environments.”); Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services
Industry, 48 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 791 (2013) [hereinafter Kaal, Wake Forest]; Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic
Regulation via Governmental Contracts, in FESTSCHRIFT FÜR PETER NOBEL ZUM 65, 70 (Peter Sester et al.
eds., 2015), http://ssrn.com/abstract=2517677 [hereinafter Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel]; Wulf A.
Kaal & Timothy Lacine, The Effect of Deferred and Non-Prosecution Agreements on Corporate
Governance: Evidence from 1993-2013, 70 BUS. LAW. 61 (2014) [hereinafter Kaal & Lacine 2014].
8 See KARL POPPER, THE POVERTY OF HISTORICISM (1957); Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 1212
(“Since then, society and markets have evolved rapidly and are becoming increasingly more complex. The
growing number of rule enactments, revisions, and revocations suggests that existing rules and institutional
structures for rulemaking are becoming less capable of addressing the rapid pace of change.”).
9 John C. Coffee, Jr., The Political Economy of Dodd-Frank: Why Financial Reform Tends To Be
Frustrated and Systemic Risk Perpetuated, 97 CORNELL L. REV. 1019, 1020-22 (2012); Kaal in Liber
Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal, Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7.
Smaller and better-organized special interest groups typically control dispersed investors and other
dominant latent groups in the competition to influence the rulemaking process. MANCUR OLSON, JR., THE
LOGIC OF COLLECTIVE ACTION (1965). The predominance of special interest groups in the rulemaking
process can be temporarily overcome during and after crises when political entrepreneurs assume the
transaction costs of organizing the otherwise disinterested latent groups. ELINOR OSTROM, GOVERNING THE
COMMONS: THE EVOLUTION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR COLLECTIVE ACTION (1990).
10 Coffee, supra note 9; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra
note 7.
11 Kaal, Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Popper, supra note 8; Christian
Kirchner, Evolution of Law̶̶̶̶̶̶: Interplay Between Private and Public Rule-Making ─ A New Institutional
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
growth of disruptive innovation is likely to expose the depth of insufficiencies and design
flaws of the existing regulatory and institutional infrastructure. More specifically, in an
environment of exponential disruptive innovation, relevant information for rulemaking is
less likely to materialize soon enough for traditional rulemaking to be effective,
regulatory issues become increasingly complex, and unknown future contingencies
increase substantially in the rulemaking process.12 In short, exponential disruptive
innovation has the potential to overwhelm the existing regulatory process.13
Policy makers and scholars are debating possible policy responses to address the
regulatory challenges associated with disruptive innovation. Some suggest that the
regulatory challenges associated with disruptive innovation can only be effectively
addressed through principles-based regulation because the existing rulemaking
procedures lack sufficient speed and flexibility.14 Others see disruptive innovation
predominantly as a competition law (unfair competition) and antitrust issue.15 Consider
the online transportation network company, Uber, and the online marketplace for
vacation homes, Airbnb. Early intervention,16 rulemaking petitions, and retrospective
review may be more appropriate remedies for the effects of disruptive innovation that
also can help address the regulatory sine curve.17 Assuming that regulatory innovation is
subject to an interdependent ecological system, others propose networks for the diffusion
of improved regulatory technology.18 Recognizing that ex ante regulation has diminished
in significance in the context of regulating disruptive innovation and artificial intelligence
(AI), others see research, development, and public operation as the only ways to identify
harmful innovation.19 Chris Brummer suggests a form of regulatory experimentalism
Economics Analysis, 4 ERASMUS L. REV. 161 (2012).
12 See infra notes 91-97 and accompanying text.
13 Because rulemakers are still attempting to comprehend the regulatory demands of the last wave of
innovative solutions, technologies, and applications while the next wave of innovation is already in full
force, exponential disruptive innovation is likely to intensify the frequencies of the regulatory sine curve
that is recognized by the literature. Kaal, Wake Forest, supra note 7; Coffee, supra note 9, at 1029-37; John
C. Coffee, Jr., Systemic Risk After Dodd-Frank: Contingent Capital and the Need for Regulatory Strategies
Beyond Oversight, 111 COLUM. L. REV. 795, 821 (2011).
14 Barefoot, infra note 52, at 9.
15 Inge Graef et al., How Google and Others Upset Competition Analysis: Disruptive Innovation and
European Competition Law (Conference Paper, 25th European Regional Conference of the International
Telecommunications Society, Brussels, Belgium, Jun. 22-25, 2014),
http://econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/101378/1/795226780.pdf.
16 Nathan Cortez, Regulating Disruptive Innovation, 29 BERKELEY TECH. L.J. 175, 201-04 (2014) (“With
novel technologies, agencies also risk paralysis by analysis. New technologies often present unforeseen
risks if under-regulated and dramatic opportunity costs if overregulated. The inclination of most regulators
is to avoid both extremes. . . . Regulators also tend to overvalue gathering information about new
technologies, which further distorts decisions on regulatory timing. . . . [E]arly interventions can benefit
both regulated industry and regulatory beneficiaries. . . . [E]arly interventions may also benefit from a more
objective regulatory atmosphere, before parties become entrenched and adversarial.”).
17 Reeve T. Bull, Building a Framework for Governance: Retrospective Review and Rulemaking Petitions,
67 ADMIN. L. REV. 265, 293-306 (2015) (urging regulatory agencies to expand the use of petitions for
rulemaking and retrospective review to achieve smarter regulation).
18 Jonathan B. Wiener, The Regulation of Technology, and the Technology of Regulation, 26 TECH. IN
SOC’Y 483, 496 (2004) (“Fourth, we should foster networks for the diffusion of regulatory innovations.
Just as private technology diffusion is crucial to economic prosperity, so the diffusion of improved public
regulatory technology is crucial to social progress.”).
19 Scherer, infra note 65, at 357.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
including selectively adopting trial periods for new regulatory approaches.20 This form
of micro-level regulatory experimentation could later be expanded to “system-wide
enterprise zones for financial market compliance and regulatory adaptation.”21
An emerging literature explores the use of informal regulation.22 Wu suggests that
traditional rulemaking is regularly impracticable in rapidly developing industries where
highly informal methods can be justified.23 Rather than relying on traditional regulatory
means in the existing regulatory framework, Wu suggests that regulatory agencies
confronting disruptive innovations should utilize “threats” for the disruptive industries,
packaged in guidance documents, warning letters etc., because such threats can help
avoid regulation that is inappropriately calibrated or premature. 24 Threats are less
burdensome than traditional regulatory approaches, more flexible, can be better fine-
tuned, and signal regulatory intent appropriately.25
We apply a data-driven approach that enables dynamic regulation as established
by Kaal26 to regulatory issues associated with disruptive innovation. The theory of
dynamic regulation conceptualizes the study of regulatory phenomena in relation to
20 Brummer, supra note 6, at 1044 (“So for example, the ban on general solicitation could be lifted for five
years, with a sunset provision triggered absent some additional regulatory blessing. Or more onerous
investigatory requirements on portals could be lifted where other (statistical or algorithmic) technologies
are used to test or limit exposures of retail investors in crowdfunded securities, but likewise set to expire
absent some regulatory finding that they insufficiently track or identify breaches in prudential requirements
for investors.”).
21 Id. at 1047 (“So, for example, avenues of special information sharing and expedited assistance could be
opened with targeted industry members for the fulfillment of desired regulatory objectives. Or investment
tax credits could be provided for market participants that undertake strategies to bolster investor protection
or market stability.”).
22 See e.g., Tim Wu, Agency Threats, 60 DUKE L.J. 1841 (2011).
23 Id. at 1841 (“There are three main ways in which agencies regulate: rulemaking; adjudication; and
informal tools of guidance, also called nonlegislative or interpretative rules. Over the last two decades,
agencies have increasingly favored the use of the last of these three, which can include statements of best
practices, interpretative guides, private warning letters, and press releases.”).
24 Id. at 1849 (“Of the three options, the first--making law--may be the worst alternative. What sounds
attractive is the prospect of an orderly, planned approach to the future. The problem is that, with so little
known about the industry, issuing specific rules based on guesses about the future runs a grave risk of
creating a bad law, or at least a law that is much worse than one issued after more development. Such
lawmaking suffers from all of the defects that Friedrich Hayek identified with central planning--impressive
in a world of perfect information, but terrible in this world.”); Contra Cortez, supra note 16, at 175
(arguing that “a flexible initial posture based primarily on ‘threats’ can calcify, creating weak defaults that
lead to suboptimal regulation in the long term. . . .If agencies are concerned about regulating prematurely or
in error, then they can experiment with timing rules, alternative enforcement mechanisms, and other
variations on traditional interventions. If agencies do choose to proceed by making threats, then they should
use them as a short-term precursor to more decisive, legally binding action, as the FCC did, and avoid
relying on them as a long-term crutch, as the FDA did.”); Jerry Brito, "Agency Threats" and the Rule of
Law: An Offer You Can't Refuse, 37 HARV. J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 553, 554 (2014) (“I conclude that not only is
Wu's thesis wrong, but it is also dangerous. Part I of this article reviews Wu's essay, defining what
constitutes an agency threat and when it is justified according to Wu. Part II critiques Wu's thesis by
showing, among other things, that it is based on a false dilemma; that it assumes an unwarranted level of
knowledge on the part of regulators; that it assumes--contrary to evidence--that regulators are good proxies
for the public interest; and that it ignores the costs of eschewing the regulatory process.”).
25 Wu, supra note 22, at 1843 (“Both agency and industry will sometimes share an interest in an informal
and flexible regime that resembles an unenforceable ‘letter of intent’ in the world of private contracts.”)
26 Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal, Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS
Kirchner, supra note 7.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
preceding and succeeding events, using institution-specific and decentralized information
to facilitate feedback effects for anticipatory rulemaking.27 The dynamic regulatory
framework allows rulemaking to overcome its historic constraints and path dependencies
that traditionally focused the rulemaking process on stable and presumptively optimal
rules. Evolving from a historically reactive process based only on preceding events/facts
and driven by the agency and collective-action problems of rulemaking, rulemaking in a
dynamic framework allows for the anticipation of future innovation trends and their
associated contingencies. Most important for the context of this article, the rapid pace of
technological developments in the telecommunications industry necessitated the use of
dynamic elements in regulation.28 The exponential growth of innovation discussed in this
article29 shows some parallels to the pace of technological developments in
telecommunications markets.
We show that data derived from venture capital investments can function as a
dynamic regulatory supplement for disruptive innovation. Venture capital’s financial
allocations to innovative projects can provide feedback for dynamic regulation of
disruptive innovation. We show how this approach can help optimize the timing of
regulation and provide anticipatory rules. We use a PitchBook Data, Inc. dataset on
venture capital investments with over 75,000 venture capital deals to illustrate that
venture capital finance allocation and deal flow, among other venture capital related data,
provide institution-specific decentralized information on innovation trends that can
provide feedback effects for dynamic regulation of disruptive innovation. Venture
capitalists’ investment allocations can measure both the risks associated with innovative
developments as well as the economic opportunities associated with such innovation.
This article has seven parts. After this brief introduction in Part I, Part II defines
the phenomenon of disruptive innovation. Part III analyzes the regulatory challenges
presented by disruptive innovation. Part IV introduces the theoretical framework for
dynamic regulation before Part V introduces the data and evaluates different venture
capital metrics that provide feedback for regulators on innovation. In Part VI we discuss
how the information and feedback provided by venture capital data can be used as a
dynamic supplement for regulation. Part VII concludes.
II. Characteristics of Disruptive Innovation
Disruptive innovation is characterized by scientific discoveries that change the
existing technological product paradigms and provide the foundation for more
competitive new technologies and products to emerge.30 By enabling discontinuous
innovations of processes, products, and services, disruptive technological innovations
27 Id at 11.
28 See Johannes M. Bauer & Erik Bohlin, From Static to Dynamic Regulation: Recent Developments in US
Telecommunications Policy, 43 INTERECONOMICS 38, 40–42 (2008) (discussing competition in
telecommunications); Paul W.J. de Bijl & Martin Peitz, Dynamic Regulation and Entry in
Telecommunications Markets: A Policy Framework, 16 INFO. ECON. & POL’Y 411, 411 (2004); Machiel
van Dijk & Machiel Mulder, Regulation of Telecommunication and Deployment of Broadband (CPB
Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis No. 131, Dec. 2005),
https://ideas.repec.org/p/cpb/memodm/131.html (exploring whether telecommunication regulations
encourage or hamper new technological development).
29 See infra notes 30-55 and accompanying text.
30 See supra note 2.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
facilitate exponential improvements in the value proposition for customers.31 Disruptive
technological innovation can be characterized by the emergence of completely new
technologies, the new combination and application of existing technologies, and the
application of new technologies to specific societal problem areas, each precipitating a
significant paradigm shift for product technology or creating entirely new paradigms.32
Disruptive innovation exemplifies Schumpeter’s “Creative Destruction,”33 i.e., the
creation of competitive strength through innovation that is followed by new demand in
new markets while destroying older and less competitive technologies and existing
markets that are based on older and less competitive technologies.34
The literature on management has studied the implications of disruptive
technologies and innovation since the mid 1990s.35 The literature warned businesses
that disrupter startups would attract new lower-end consumers by offering inexpensive
substitutes for products and would then gradually move upmarket by attracting higher-
end consumers, suggesting that businesses act quickly when disrupters appear and either
acquire the disrupter or incubate a competing business that embraces the disruptive
technology. 36 A market leader’s lack of investment in disruptive technologies often
results in the abrupt loss of market dominance and often even total replacement in such
markets.37 Market leaders often shortsightedly refuse to cannibalize their market dominance
through the use of disruptive technologies. This enables small entrepreneurial firms with no
established customer base to take advantage of disruptive technologies and redefine such
31 See supra note 4.
32 Kostoff et al., supra note 2, at 142; Steven T. Walsh & Jonathan D. Linton, Infrastructure for Emergent
Industries Based on Discontinuous Innovations, 12 ENG. MGMT. J. 23, 24 (2000).
33 Schumpeter described the “gaels of creative destruction,” often unleashed by technology, that
periodically sweep through industries and sink weak and outdated firms. JOSEPH A. SCHUMPETER,
CAPITALISM, SOCIALISM, AND DEMOCRACY 83-84 (3rd ed.1962) (“The opening up of new markets, foreign
or domestic, and the organizational development from the craft shop and factory to such concerns as U.S.
Steel illustrate the process of industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure
from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one. This process of Creative
Destruction is the essential fact about capitalism. It is what capitalism consists in and what every capitalist
concern has got to live in. . . . Every piece of business strategy acquires its true significance only against
the background of that process and within the situation created by it. It must be seen in its role in the
perennial gale of creative destruction; it cannot be understood irrespective of it or, in fact, on the hypothesis
that there is a perennial lull.”)
34 Aron S. Spencer & Bruce A. Kirchhoff, Schumpeter and New Technology Based Firms: Towards a
Framework for How NTBFs Cause Creative Destruction, 2 INT’L ENTREPRENEURSHIP & MGMT. J. 145, 148
(2006) (“However, the new entrant is able to find or create a market for the innovation, where it matures,
and improves in performance. When the performance achieves rough parity with the old product, the new
product sweeps through the market, offering equal or superior performance along with a smaller size and
reduced price. The old product, and frequently the firm that produced it, exit the market. It is quite clear
that this phenomenon is, in fact, ‘creative destruction’.”).
35 CLAYTON M. CHRISTENSEN, THE INNOVATOR’S DILEMMA: WHEN NEW TECHNOLOGIES CAUSE GREAT
FIRMS TO FAIL (1997); GEOFFREY MOORE, CROSSING THE CHASM (1991).
36 Bower & Christensen, supra note 2; LARRY DOWNES & PAUL NUNES, BIG BANG DISRUPTION (2013).
Contra Andrew A. King & Baljir Baatartogokh, How Useful Is the Theory of Disruptive Innovation?, 57
MIT SLOAN MGMT. REV. 77 (2015) (“In summary, although Christensen and Raynor selected the 77 cases
as examples of the theory of disruptive innovation, our survey of experts reveals that many of the cases do
not correspond closely with the theory. In fact, their responses suggest that only seven of the cases (9%)
contained all four elements of the theory that we asked about.”).
37 Bower & Christensen, supra note 2, at 43 (“One of the most consistent patterns in business is the failure
of leading companies to stay at the top of their industries when technologies or markets change.”).
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
markets.38 Market leaders, successful institutions, and managers fail when they do not
distinguish sustaining technologies from disruptive technologies.39
Successful disruptive products of the last fifteen years displayed shared core
characteristics that were facilitated by growth and advancement in core disruptive
technologies. Revolutionizing products in the past few decades that were based on
disruptive technological innovation were typically smaller in size, lighter, cheaper, more
convenient and flexible, more reliable, had better unit performance with higher
efficiency, and were more user friendly than prior products.40 These characteristics typically
require significant advances and growth in artificial intelligence and technologies
including micro- or nanotechnologies, as well as materials and component technologies.
Disruptive innovation via so-called big-bang disruptions differs from more-
traditional innovation. Big-bang disruptors not only often offer a much cheaper product
in comparison with the established products, but they are also better integrated with other
products and services and are often more inventive.41 In today’s age of social media, big-
38 Id. at 51 (“Small, hungry organizations are good at placing economical bets, rolling with the punches,
and agilely changing product and market strategies in response to feedback from initial forays into the
market.”); Constantinos D. Charitou & Constantinos C. Markides, Responses to Disruptive Strategic
Innovation, 44 MIT SLOAN MGMT. REV. 55, 56 (2003) (“Second, disruptive strategic innovations usually
start out as small and low-margin businesses. That’s why they rarely gain support or long-term
commitment from established competitors. The innovations are small and are not attractive until they start
growing.”); Contra Larry Downes & Paul Nunes, Big-Bang Disruption, HARV. BUS. REV., MAR. 2013, at
44, 46, https://hbr.org/2013/03/big-bang-disruption/ (“The strategic model of disruptive innovation we’ve
all become comfortable with has a blind spot. It assumes that disrupters start with a lower-priced, inferior
alternative that chips away at the least profitable segments, giving an incumbent business time to start a
skunkworks and develop its own next-generation products. That advice hasn’t been much help to
navigation-product makers like TomTom, Garmin, and Magellan. Free navigation apps, now preloaded on
every smartphone, are not only cheaper but better than the stand-alone devices those companies sell. And
thanks to the robust platform provided by the iOS and Android operating systems, navigation apps are
constantly improving, with new versions distributed automatically through the cloud.”).
39 Sustaining technologies are technologies that improve the performance of existing products through
close cooperation with customers. By contrast, disruptive technologies provide value parameters not
recognized by the mainstream market and in the short-run can even show less product performance in
comparison with the existing products that are valued by the mainstream market. Kostoff et al., supra
note 2, at 144 (“The near-term individual rewards from sustaining technologies that yield short-term low-
risk payoffs displace the longer term social benefits that could result from proactive high-risk high-payoff
disruptive technology selection. The procedural problem is that technology selection decisions, especially in
large established commercial and government organizations, are increasingly being made by larger and
more inclusive committees, a process traditionally steeped in tradition and conservatism.
Revolutionary disruptive concepts are less likely (on average) to receive committee approval than
evolutionary sustaining concepts.”).
40 Kostoff et al., supra note 2, at 143; Walsh, supra note 4, at 170 (“Bower and Christensen champion the
‘different’ nature of disruptive technologies emphasizing that they may not be ‘radically new from a
technological point of view’ but have superior ‘performance trajectories’ along critical dimensions that
customers' value. Abernathy and Clark and others argue that disruptive technologies' radical newness or
emergent character is an important element in its definition since robust manufacturing infrastructure is
either limited or nonexistent.”).
41 Downes & Nunes, supra note 38, at 46 (“The first key to survival is understanding that big-bang
disruptions differ from more-traditional innovations not just in degree but in kind. Besides being cheaper
than established offerings, they’re also more inventive and better integrated with other products and
services. And today many of them exploit consumers’ growing access to product information and ability to
contribute to and share it.”).
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
bang disruptors can successfully exploit consumers’ advanced access to product
information and consumers’ ability to contribute to products and share such contributions
and products improvements via social media and other outlets.42 Internet fads and
products can be accessible to consumers in the entire world within a matter of days.43
Big-bang disrupters typically launch businesses without a foundation, using cloud
computing, open platforms built on the internet, and fast-cycling mobile devices. Big-
bang disrupters often produce multiple new products to identify which products may take
hold in the market. While most such products will fail, the payoff associated with the
unconstrained growth of those products that succeed is substantial and facilitates and
often accelerates other forms of disruptive innovation.44
Big data is a significant driver of disruptive innovation. The idea of N=All,
facilitated by big data, allows researchers to understand correlations that are completely
unprecedented and to revolutionize our world.45 Big data in the form of digitized data
that grows at exponential rates and can be captured and manipulated electronically draws
on several core sources including the internet of things, public records, social media, and
cameras, as well as satellite tracking.46 Big data benefits not only industry and
researchers; it also increases consumer choice through publicly available websites
providing big data analyses intended to support consumers’ decision-making processes.
Despite the overwhelming benefits associated with big data, big data’s use of such
disparate sources creates challenges for the integration of data and normalizing.47 The
42 Steve Denning, The Business Disease with No Cure: Big Bang Disruption, FORBES (Feb. 22, 2014,
3:55PM), http://www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2014/02/22/the-business-disease-without-a-cure-big-
bang-disruption/ (“And, in today’s world of ‘near perfect market information’ and social media, the best
quickly becomes a function of social consensus, not objective reality. That is why we say marketing’s main
function has shifted from selling to creating social consensus.”).
43 For instance, consumers downloaded an ad-supported version of a game called ”Angry Birds” over a
million times within the first 24 hours of its release. Seven months thereafter, consumers downloaded that
game more than 200 million times. Downes & Nunes, supra note 38, at 46.
44 Id. at 48 (“In the bizarro world of big-bang disrupters, it is perfectly rational to churn out dozens of new
products and see which ones take hold. Like venture capital investments, most will fail outright. But just
one success can pay off big.”).
45 KENNETH CUKIER & VIKTOR MAYER-SCHONBERGER, BIG DATA: A REVOLUTION THAT WILL
TRANSFORM HOW WE LIVE, WORK AND THINK (2013).
46 Id.; EXEC. OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, BIG DATA: SEIZING OPPORTUNITIES, PRESERVING VALUES 53
(2014), https://goo.gl/xtDerj (“Big data technologies, together with the sensors that ride on the ‘Internet of
Things,’ pierce many spaces that were previously private. Signals from home WiFi networks reveal how
many people are in a room and where they are seated.”); James Manyika et al., Big Data: The Next
Frontier for Innovation, Competition, and Productivity 15 (McKinsey Global Institute Report, May 2011),
http://goo.gl/GBzeLR (“We estimate that new data stored by enterprises exceeded 7 exabytes of data
globally in 2010 and that new data stored by consumers around the world that year exceeded an additional
6 exabytes. To put these very large numbers in context, the data that companies and individuals are
producing and storing is equivalent to filling more than 60,000 US Libraries of Congress. If all words
spoken by humans were digitized as text, they would total about 5 exabytes—less than the new data stored
by consumers in a year. The increasing volume and detail of information captured by enterprises, together
with the rise of multimedia, social media, and the Internet of Things will fuel exponential growth in data
for the foreseeable future.”).
47 Manyika et al., supra note 46, at 12 (“To capture value from big data, organizations will have to deploy
new technologies (e.g., storage, computing, and analytical software) and techniques (i.e., new types of
analyses). The range of technology challenges and the priorities set for tackling them will differ depending
on the data maturity of the institution. Legacy systems and incompatible standards and formats too often
prevent the integration of data and the more sophisticated analytics that create value from big data. New
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
literature mostly takes issue with the big data inaccuracies that occur when collecting
data from databases that merely require generalized accuracy.48 Big data is often not the
output of instruments designed to generate valid and reliable data suitable for scientific
analysis. Foundational data issues of construct validity, measurement, reliability, and data
dependencies are the same regardless of data quantities.49 Some critique the implicit
assumption of big data researchers that big data is a substitute for traditional data
collection and analysis rather than a mere supplement50 while others see big data and
small data not as mutually exclusive but as reinforcing and supporting each other.51 Big
data shortcomings can largely be addressed with artificial intelligence, and the
problems and growing computing power will spur the development of new analytical techniques. There is
also a need for ongoing innovation in technologies and techniques that will help individuals and
organizations to integrate, analyze, visualize, and consume the growing torrent of big data.”); Christian
Bizer et al., The Meaningful Use of Big Data: Four Perspectives—Four Challenges, SIGMOD REC., Dec.
2011, at 56, 57. (“My challenge is meaningful data integration in the real, messy, often schema-less, and
complex Big Data World of databases and the (Semantic) Web using multi-disciplinary, multi-technology
methods.”).
48Bizer et al., supra note 47, at 57 (“The Web is an open medium in which everybody can publish data on
the Web. As the classic document Web, the Web of Data contains data that is outdated, conflicting, or
intentionally wrong (SPAM). Thus, one of the main challenges that Linked Data applications need to
handle is to assess the quality of Web data and determine the subset of the available data that should be
treated as trustworthy.”); IAN AYRES, SUPER CRUNCHERS: WHY THINKING-BY-NUMBERS IS THE NEW WAY
TO BE SMART 60-63 (2007) (identifying big data phenomenon); Andrea Lancichinetti et al., High-
Reproducibility and High-Accuracy Method for Automated Topic Classification, 5 PHYSICAL REV. X
011007 (2015) (detailing the inaccuracy problems associated with big data text analysis/machine reading
(called LDA)).
49 See David Lazer et al., The Parable of Google Flue: Traps in Big Data Analysis, 343 SCIENCE 1203
(2014); Gary Marcus & Ernest Davis, Eight (No, Nine!) Problems with Big Data, N.Y. TIMES (Apr. 6,
2014), http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/07/opinion/eight-no-nine-problems-with-big-data.html (“Reliable
statistical information can be compiled about common trigrams, precisely because they appear frequently.
But no existing body of data will ever be large enough to include all the trigrams that people might use,
because of the continuing inventiveness of language.”); Tim Harford, Big Data: Are We Making a Big
Mistake?, FIN. TIMES (Mar. 28, 2014), http://goo.gl/2dyox2 ("Statisticians have spent the past 200 years
figuring out what traps lie in wait when we try to understand the world through data. The data are bigger,
faster and cheaper these days – but we must not pretend that the traps have all been made safe. They have
not.”).
50 Jeff Leek, Why Big Data Is in Trouble: They Forgot About Applied Statistics, SIMPLYSTATS (May 7,
2014), http://goo.gl/2dyox2 (“Statistical thinking has also been conspicuously absent from major public big
data efforts so far.”).
51 Lazer et al., supra note 49, at 1205 (“There is a tendency for big data research and more traditional
applied statistics to live in two different realms—aware of each other's existence but generally not very
trusting of each other. Big data offer enormous possibilities for understanding human interactions at a
societal scale, with rich spatial and temporal dynamics, and for detecting complex interactions and
nonlinearities among variables. We contend that these are the most exciting frontiers in studying human
behavior. However, traditional ‘small data’ often offer information that is not contained (or containable) in
big data, and the very factors that have enabled big data are enabling more traditional data collection. The
Internet has opened the way for improving standard surveys, experiments, and health reporting. Instead of
focusing on a ‘big data revolution,’ perhaps it is time we were focused on an ‘all data revolution,’ where we
recognize that the critical change in the world has been innovative analytics, using data from all traditional
and new sources, and providing a deeper, clearer understanding of our world.”).
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
combination of big data and artificial intelligence opens up significant additional big data
applications.52
Artificial intelligence (AI) presents another significant field of disruptive
innovation. AI is different from a regular computer algorithm. AI tries to emulate human
thought processes and rational human behavior through self-learning and storage of
experiences.53 Because it emulates human behavior, AI can act differently in the same
situations, depending on the actions previously performed. Many sectors of the economy
are already significantly affected by the rapid advances in AI during the past decade.54
The exponential development of AI and the associated disruptive innovation pose
52 Jo Ann S. Barefoot, Disrupting Fintech Law, FINTECH L. REP., Mar,-Apr. 2015, at 6 (“Terms like
‘machine learning’, ‘deep learning,’ and ‘neural networks’ are entering the lexicon, referring to the fast-
growing ability of machines to gather and analyze vast volumes of information in ways, and at speeds,
hitherto unimaginable. …Computers today can take on a question or task; search all the digitized
information in the world; analyze what might be responsive to the goal; suggest possibilities; learn from
feedback; and endlessly improve results. In the medical realm, for instance, machines can diagnose cancer
with accuracy rivaling and surpassing that of human pathologists, and can ‘collaborate’ with humans to
enhance the outcomes that either could reach alone. Importantly, machines have ‘noticed’ things they were
not even asked to find, such as characteristics of tissue outside a malignancy, bringing such observations to
the attention of doctors who then have pursued new pathways of study and medical diagnosis. Computers
can conduct searches in seconds, hours, or days that would take humans hours, months, or even years to
execute. They efficiently synthesize images, data, and words, in any language, from across the globe, and
then present analysis and conclusions in conversational language and useful graphics.”); Daniel E.
O’Leary, Artificial Intelligence and Big Data, IEEE INTELLIGENT SYS., Mar.-Apr. 2013, at 96, 97 (“AI
researchers have long been interested in building applications that analyze unstructured data, and in
somehow categorizing or structuring that data so that the resulting information can be used directly to
understand a process or to interface with other applications. As an example, Johan Bollen and Huina Mao
[footnote omitted] found that stock market predictions of the Dow Jones Industrial average were improved
by considering the overall ‘sentiment’ of the stock market— this is an unstructured concept, but based on
structured data generated from Google.”); Maryam M. Najabadi et al., Deep Learning Applications and
Challenges in Big Data Analytics, 2 J. BIG DATA 11 (2015) (“[P]erforming discriminative tasks in Big Data
Analytics one can use Deep Learning algorithms to extract complicated nonlinear features from the raw
data, and then use simple linear models to perform discriminative tasks using the extracted features as
input. This approach has two advantages: (1) extracting features with Deep Learning adds nonlinearity to
the data analysis, associating the discriminative tasks closely to Artificial Intelligence, and (2) applying
relatively simple linear analytical models on the extracted features is more computationally efficient, which
is important for Big Data Analytics.”).
53 Robert D. Hof, 10 Breakthrough Technologies 2013: Deep Learning, MIT TECH. REV. (Apr. 23, 2013),
http://www.technologyreview.com/featuredstory/513696/deep-learning/ (“With massive amounts of
computational power, machines can now recognize objects and translate speech in real time. Artificial
intelligence is finally getting smart.”); STUART RUSSELL & PETER NORVIG, ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: A
MODERN APPROACH 5 (2013) (describing the different major definitions for AI); Paulius Cerka et al.,
Liability for Damages Caused by Artificial Intelligence, 31 COMPUTER L. & SEC. REV. 376, 378 (2015)
(“This belief began to change due to constant improvement of computer systems. Intellect, i.e. the ability to
know, understand, and think, may not only be innate (natural), but also artificially created. AI is a broad
area that includes such subfields as: (i) natural language systems; (ii) machine learning; (iii) simulation of
senses; (iv) neural networks; (v) computer games; (vi) expert systems; and (vii) robotics.”).
54 Craig E. Karl, The Three Breakthroughts That Have Finally Unleashed AI on the World, WIRED (Oct. 27,
2014, 6:30AM), http://www.wired.com/2014/10/future-of-artificial-intelligence/ (“Over the past five years,
cheap computing, novel algorithms, and mountains of data have enabled new AI-based services that were
previously the domain of sci-fi and academic white papers. [Examples include the:] Self-Driving
Car…Body Tracker…Personal Photo Archivist…Universal Translator…Smarter News Feed.”).
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
substantial challenges for policy makers in education, financial markets, labor markets,
and other areas.55
III. Disruptive Innovation as a Regulatory Challenge
Regulatory concerns associated with disruptive technologies will likely increase in
the coming years. Disruptive innovative technology often does not fit into existing legal
categories created by recalcitrant regulatory structures.56 Examples of existing regulatory
concerns that may be exacerbated by future developments include the possible hacking of
digital devices either to obtain information or to take control, the remote controlling of a
driverless car, the hacking of pacemakers of influential elites, and the remote controlling
of an individual’s computer to demand a ransom, among many others.57 AI may not only
fundamentally challenge traditional employment law structures,58 AI and automation may
eventually play important roles in causing large dislocations in labor markets.59 In
finance, it remains unclear how to treat crowdfunding technology that allows firms and
individuals to raise money through bottom-up funding rather than traditional capital
55 ERIK BRYNJOLFSSON & ANDREW MCAFEE, THE SECOND MACHINE AGE: WORK, PROGRESS, AND
PROSPERITY IN A TIME OF BRILLIANT TECHNOLOGIES 205-28 (2014) (discussing policy in the face of
projected automation of low-skill labor); Tess Townsend, Peter Diamandis: A.I. Will Lead to Massive
Disruption Across Industries, INC. (Sept. 24, 2015), http://www.inc.com/tess-townsend/diamandis-
artificial-intelligence.html (“He said self-driving cars will render car insurance and the need for more roads
obsolete. He anticipates his children will never drive. He projected that advances in camera technology will
lead to cameras woven into clothes, biometric sensing will ‘massively disrupt’ medicine, and satellites will
be able to watch raw materials entering factories and finished products leaving them, enabling smart AI to
extract financial performance data ahead of the markets.”).
56 Examples include the question of how to categorize those who participate in the sharing economy into
the standard employee-independent contractor framework, how crowdfunding works with the regulatory
structure of private securities offerings, or how cryptocurrencies (such as BitCoin) fit with regulatory
structure around currencies and bank reporting requirements. See Felix Salmon, When Disruption Meets
Regulation, REUTERS (Jan. 30, 2014), http://blogs.reuters.com/felix-salmon/2014/01/30/when-disruption-
meets-regulation/; Balaji S. Srinivasan, Regulation, Disruption, and the Technologies of 2013,
http://goo.gl/sjZ3tF (providing an overview of the major conflicts between the traditional regulatory
structures and innovative disruptors, with quotes from Elon Musk, Airbnb founders, other top
entrepreneurs).
57 Mark Harris, Researcher Hacks Self-Driving Car Sensors, IEEE SPECTRUM (Sept. 4, 2015, 19:00 GMT),
http://goo.gl/rrlnP6; Aarti Shanani, Ransomware: When Hackers Lock Your Files, To Pay or Not To Pay,
NPR ALLTECHCONSIDERED (Dec. 8, 2014, 6:27AM ET), http://goo.gl/8Ybj8o; Tarun Wadhwa, Yes, You
Can Hack a Pacemaker (and Other Medical Devices Too), FORBES (Dec. 6, 2012, 8:31AM),
http://goo.gl/oglPhS.
58 There are major issues of whether to classify Uber and Lyft drivers as independent contractors or
employees. Uber’s innovative model essentially requires them to be non-employees, but many claim such
classification harms existing firms that have to comply with California’s extensive labor law requirements.
Berwick v. Uber Tech., Inc., No. 11-46739 EK, 2015 WL 4153765 (CA Dep’t of Labor Jun. 3, 2015)
(deciding Uber workers were indeed employees, and Uber must comply with California labor law in this
regard). See also Mike Isaac & Natasha Singer, California Says Uber Driver Is Employee, Not a
Contractor, N.Y. TIMES, Jun. 17, 2015, http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/18/business/uber-contests-
california-labor-ruting-that-says-drivers-should-be-employees.html?_r=0.
59 John Komlos, Has Creative Destruction Become More Destructive? (NBER Working Paper No. 20379),
http://www.nber.org/papers/w20379 (suggesting that the creative destruction aspect of capitalism is being
amplified, especially in labor markets, by the exponential pace of technology).
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
markets.60 While acknowledging positive traits associated with crowdfunding technology,
many commentators are concerned about the possibility of fraud, the breakdown of
traditional protections for small investors, privacy violations, and intellectual property
issues.61
AI and its disruptive capabilities present significant regulatory challenges in the
existing regulatory framework. AI’s ability to accumulate and learn from experiences, to
make individual decisions, and to act without supervision creates the possibility of
causing damage to other technologies or humans. 62 Should AI unknowingly cause
damage, any forms of compensation would have to be addressed through existing legal
provisions in the existing regulatory framework. However, national and international law
do not (currently) recognize AI as a subject of law. Without legal personality, AI cannot
be personally liable for damages.63 With autonomous AI playing an expanding role in
society, an increasing number of scientists and entrepreneurs suggest that government
regulation may be necessary to reduce the risks to the public associated with the rapid
advances in AI.64 While some favor an indirect form of AI regulation based on
differential tort liability, 65 others oppose rigid regulation of AI because regulation may
inhibit the socially beneficial innovations associated with AI, or they suggest such
60 Thomas L. Hazen, Crowdfunding or Fraudfunding? Social Networks and the Securities Laws--Why the
Specially Tailored Exemption Must Be Conditioned on Meaningful Disclosure, 90 N.C. L. REV. 1735, 1736
(2012) (“Social networks have been used as a medium for financing films and other forms of art, as well as
for charitable solicitations. These and similar fundraising endeavors are known as crowdfunding.
Crowdfunding is the fundraising analog to crowdsourcing, which refers to mass collaboration efforts
through large numbers of people, generally using social media or the Internet.”).
61 See generally id.; Letter from William F. Galvin, Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, to
Elizabeth M. Murphy, Secretary, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 1-2 (Aug. 8, 2012),
http://www.sec.gov/comments/jobs-title-iii/jobstitleiii-121.pdf (“Crowdfunding represents a significant
departure from long-established rules for public offerings of securities. . . . Crowdfunding is designed to
permit the smallest investors to participate in securities offerings by early-stage companies. Our experience
is that these investors are especially vulnerable in the small-company segment of the market.”).
62 Cerka et al., supra note 53, at 376 (“The ability to accumulate experience and learn from it, as well as the
ability to act independently and make individual decisions, creates preconditions for damage. Factors
leading to the occurrence of damage identified in the article confirm that the operation of AI is based on the
pursuit of goals. This means that with its actions AI may cause damage for one reason or another; and thus
issues of compensation will have to be addressed in accordance with the existing legal provisions.”).
63 Id. (“In the absence of direct legal regulation of AI, we can apply article 12 of United Nations
Convention on the Use of Electronic Communications in International Contracts, which states that a person
(whether a natural person or a legal entity) on whose behalf a computer was programmed should ultimately
be responsible for any message generated by the machine. Such an interpretation complies with a general
rule that the principal of a tool is responsible for the results obtained by the use of that tool since the tool
has no independent volition of its own. So the concept of AI-as-Tool arises in the context of AI liability
issues, which means that in some cases vicarious and strict liability is applicable for AI actions.”).
64 Sharon Gaudin, A.I. Researchers Say Elon Musk’s Fears ‘Not Completely Crazy’, COMPUTERWORLD
(Oct. 29, 2014, 1:16PM PT), http://goo.gl/3K91LD (“I think we should be very careful about artificial
intelligence," Musk said when answering a question about the state of AI. "If I were to guess at what our
biggest existential threat is, it's probably that …With artificial intelligence, we are summoning the demon.
In all those stories with the guy with the pentagram and the holy water, and he's sure he can control the
demon. It doesn't work out.”); Rory Cellan-Jones, Stephen Hawking Warns Artificial Intelligence Could
End Mankind, BBC NEWS (Dec. 2, 2014), http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-30290540 (“He told the
BBC: ‘The development of full artificial intelligence could spell the end of the human race.’").
65 Matthew U. Scherer, Regulating Artificial Intelligence Systems: Risks, Challenges, Competencies, and
Strategies, 29 HARV. J. L. & TECH. 353 (2016).
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
regulation is impossible in the face of such a powerful and exponentially growing
technology.66 AI is currently not able to match human-level reasoning,67 but it can still
have an impact on the service industries, among others.68
A regulatory response to disruptive innovation requires policy makers to balance
legitimate policy objectives such as consumer protection, privacy, and public welfare
while avoiding regulatory capture and policies that predominantly protect incumbent
firms. In the startup phase and before gaining substantial market share, disruptive firms
often create products or provide services that either do not fit into the existing regulatory
framework and the protections provided thereby, or such disruptive products and services
do not or do not fully comply with existing regulatory protections. In the latter case,
disruptive firms often argue that because of the unprecedented nature of the disruptive
product or service the existing rules do not or should not apply or that compliance with
the existing rules is not necessary to protect the public because more appropriate
consumer protections are available through the disruptive firm.69 If disruptive firms do
not comply with existing rules or create their own exemptions because the existing
66 You, Robot?, ECONOMIST (Sept. 1, 2012), http://www.economist.com/node/21560986 (“Regulators must
tread carefully. Noel Sharkey, a computer scientist at the University of Sheffield, observes that overly rigid
regulations might stifle innovation. But a lack of legal clarity leaves device-makers, doctors, patients and
insurers in the dark. The RoboLaw researchers hope to square this circle when they deliver their findings in
2014. So far, though, they seem to have more questions than answers.”); John Danaher, Is Regulation of
Artificial Intelligence Possible?, H+ MAG. (Jul. 15, 2015), http://goo.gl/vMw8et (“Despite these worries,
debates about the proper role of government regulation of AI have generally been lacking. There are a
number of explanations for this: law is nearly always playing catch-up when it comes to technological
advances; there is a decidedly anti-government libertarian bent to some of the leading thinkers and
developers of AI; and the technology itself would seem to elude traditional regulatory structures.”).
67 Richard Waters, Artificial Intelligence: Machine v. Man, FIN. TIMES (Oct. 31, 2015),
http://goo.gl/8gaWQn (“Their effort is prompted by a fear of what will happen when computers match
humans in intelligence. At that point, humans would cede leadership in technological development, since
the machines would be capable of improving their own designs by themselves. And with the accelerating
pace of technological change, it wouldn’t be long before the capabilities – and goals – of the computers
would far surpass human understanding.”).
68 Harry Surden, Machine Learning and Law, 89 WASH. L. REV. 87, 88 (2014) (“In the last few decades,
researchers have successfully used machine learning to automate a variety of sophisticated tasks that were
previously presumed to require human cognition. These applications range from autonomous (i.e., self-
driving) cars, to automated language translation, prediction, speech recognition, and computer
vision. Researchers have also begun to apply these techniques in the context of law.”).
69 Benjamin G. Edelman & Damien Geradin, Efficiencies and Regulatory Shortcuts: How Should We
Regulate Companies Like Airbnb and Uber? 19 Stan. Tech. L. Rev. 293, 295-96 (2016),
http://journals.law.stanford.edu/stanford-technology-law-review/print/volume-19/issue-2/efficiencies-and-
regulatory-shortcuts-how-should-we-regulate-companies (“[W]e observe that many platform operators
advertise their services as ‘sharing.’ For example, short-term property rental service Airbnb says its service
lets hosts ‘share their homes with guests’ while transportation service Lyft says it offers ‘ridesharing.’ The
term ‘sharing’ partially captures some aspects of these companies’ activities, e.g., employing a single
resource for multiple purposes, such as using a vehicle both for an owner’s personal needs and to transport
paying passengers. Moreover, the key efficiencies generally do not come from ‘sharing’ but from the
market structure that platforms facilitate, including casual service providers who avoid the fixed cost and,
often, regulation associated with traditional service.”); Andy Kessler, The Weekend Interview with Brian
Chesky: The ‘Sharing Economy’ and Its Enemies, WALL ST. J., Jan. 18-19, 2014, at A11. [Uber cofounder
Brain Chesky said of the current regulatory structure]: “There were laws created for businesses, and there
were laws for people. What the sharing economy did was create a third category: people as businesses,” to
which the application of existing laws is often unclear.).
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
regulatory framework does not apply and appropriate rules are not available, public
policy goals can be undermined and incumbent firms that continue to be subject to
existing rules encounter often severe competitive disadvantages.70 To counteract such
disadvantages, incumbent firms that are exposed to a perceived threat of disruptive
innovation from disruptive firms may attempt to use the existing regulatory process to
create obstacles for disruptive firms to compete.
The anticipated level of innovation in the next thirty years71 makes it increasingly
less likely that rulemakers will be able to effectively protect the public while harnessing
innovation for the benefit of society. The combination of harm and possible benefits that
are associated with disruptive innovation can either equally affect both consumers and
providers or it can benefit a subset of consumers and providers while another subset
suffers adverse consequences; it can also create tradeoffs for subsets of providers and
consumers. As accelerating disruptive technology creates new complexity for society at a
rapidly accelerating pace, especially in significant growth areas such as robotics,
nanotechnology, and biotechnology,72 society increasingly struggles with analyzing the
wealth of new, beneficial, and ever more detailed information received from disruptive
technologies.73 The negative and positive impact of disruptive innovation will trigger
political and policy pressures for and against various regulatory responses to change. The
political system is, however, less likely to be able to deal with the challenges of
disruptive innovation because the increasing complexity of innovation-driven regulatory
issues causes political and policy makers’ confusion over rapidly-emerging disruptive
change, making a coherent political and policy solution to these challenges less likely.
The existing regulatory infrastructure cannot sufficiently distinguish and harness
beneficial innovation. Rulemakers’ inability to address regulatory issues associated with
disruptive innovation will likely generate high levels of legal uncertainty and
inconsistency74 that inhibit innovation during technological transition periods; and
technological transition is likely going to be a permanent state in the age of disruptive
70 See Edelman & Geradin, supra note 69, at 23 (“Most regulatory regimes require full service to
disfavored groups, including racial minorities, low-income users, and low-income regions. Software
platforms tend to circumvent these requirements, either through decentralized decision-making that favors
individual preferences over government mandates, or through software implementations that otherwise do
not require compliance.”).
71 See supra notes 30-55 and accompanying text.
72 See infra Table 4.
73 John O. McGinnis, Accelerating Ai, 104 NW. U. L. REV. 1253, 1269 (2010) (“The problem now is that
the information available to be processed may be swelling beyond human capacity to achieve sound social
decisionmaking without the aid of AI.”).
74 Barefoot, supra note 52, at 18 (“[The United States has] five federal agencies that directly examine and
supervise financial institutions (Comptroller of the Currency, FDIC, Federal Reserve Board, CFPB, and
National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)). At least 20 federal agencies regulate some aspect of
financial products, from mortgages and student loans to retirement funds, and/or have enforcement
mandates that include financial services, as with the Department of Justice (DOJ) and the FTC. Much of
this complexity is multiplied by fifty at the state level, plus insurance products are almost entirely regulated
by the states. . . . All or most of these regulatory bodies have at least fragmentary responsibility relating to
the broad, overarching consumer protection themes discussed above, such as privacy, data security, UDAP,
fair lending, and the like. As these and other regulatory standards shift and escalate under pressure from
fast-changing technology, it seems inevitable that the complexity of this structure will exacerbate
uncertainty and inconsistency in regulatory expectations, and will militate against modernization that might
address problems efficiently and serve consumers well.”).
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
innovation, which exacerbates the uncertainty and inconsistency created by rulemakers’
inability to react timely and adequately to disruptive innovation. In the existing
regulatory framework, regulators and commenters are engaged in a long, drawn-out
feedback process that involves hearings, proposed rules, the submission of comment
letters, and finally agency lawyers finalizing a rule after considering the comments. The
current regulatory framework lacks a mechanism that succinctly and anticipatorily
informs rulemakers of beneficial innovative ideas. In fact, the existing rulemaking
process prohibits ex parte communications and insufficiently integrates brainstorming
and ideas across industries, and therefore may actually undermine innovation.
1. Ex Post Facts-Based (Trial-and-Error) Rulemaking
The ex-post facts-based, trial-and-error-rulemaking in the existing regulatory
framework75 often produces suboptimal regulatory outcomes that may no longer be
sustainable as disruptive innovation accelerates and causes unprecedented societal
change. The ex-post facts-based approach to rulemaking has functioned in the existing
regulatory framework because optimal requirements for rules do become clear when
stable and presumptively optimal rules emerge as suboptimal. A prerequisite for
rulemaking is thus the availability of the information on optimized rule requirements. In
an age of exponential innovation, that information may not materialize at all or may not
materialize in time for traditional rulemaking to be effective. In other words, because
facts-based rulemaking did not anticipate regulatory issues created by innovation,
rulemakers may not at all or much too late realize what new regulatory demands apply to
a given innovation and associated regulatory issue.
2. Stable and Presumptively Optimal Rules
The existing regulatory infrastructure, including Congress, regulatory agencies, self-
regulatory bodies, and the literature on regulation, relies almost exclusively on stable and
presumptively optimal rules.76 Such stable and presumptively optimal rules are created to
address perceived regulatory issues identified by lawmakers through centralized
information in the then-existing economic and market conditions. Stable and
presumptively optimal rules are tailored and drafted to attain permanent solutions for
perceived regulatory issues that can be addressed with sufficient political support at the
time of drafting.77 The underlying conditions for rulemaking and the corresponding
requirements for optimal and stable rules are, however, subject to constant and ever-
increasing amounts of change.78 The exponential growth of technology, the associated
exponential growth of innovation, and the resulting growth in the complexity of
regulatory issues will likely require ever-increasing numbers of governance adjustments
75 Popper, supra note 8; Kirchner, supra note 11.
76 See Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 1212 (“[T]he institutional infrastructure for rulemaking was
geared towards the creation of rules for governing a relatively stable society with less upward mobility and
relatively stable economic and market environments.”); Kaal, Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in Liber
Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal & Lacine 2014, supra note 7.
77 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 1218.
78 Id.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
via stable and presumptively optimal rules,79 making it increasingly less likely that
rulemakers will be able to effectively protect the public via stable and presumptively
optimal rules. If rulemakers cannot adequately protect their constituents, regulatory
supplements facilitating anticipatory rulemaking may be justified.
The existing regulatory infrastructure with stable rules and stable rulemaking
processes is subject to significant systemic constraints and path dependencies.
Historically, a comparatively small, stable, and less interconnected society with limited
upward mobility and relatively stable economic and market environments for rulemaking
created an institutional infrastructure for rulemaking that produces stable and
presumptively optimal rules to address a limited set of readily identifiable regulatory
issues.80 Because of the limited scope of regulatory issues and the need for consensus-
driven institutional designs, the historically evolved infrastructure for rulemaking could
cope with its inherent collective action problems,81 regulatory cycles,82 and trial-and-error
rulemaking,83 without major disruptions. The exponential growth of technology and its
associated disruptive innovation84 are likely to expose the depth of issues related to the
path dependencies in the existing regulatory infrastructure and the associated design
flaws of the institutional infrastructure.
3. Timing
The timing of regulation in an environment of disruptive innovation should be a
primary concern for policy makers. If policy makers regulate too early, they risk
inhibiting innovation; if they withhold regulation too long, they may harm consumers and
markets if regulatory inertia sets in around the disruptive product or service. The time
frame for rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure may be inadequate to
address regulatory challenges associated with disruptive innovation. In the existing
regulatory framework, regulators and commenters are engaged in a long, drawn-out
feedback process that involves hearings, proposed rules, the submission of comment
79 MAEVE P. CAREY, COUNTING REGULATIONS: AN OVERVIEW OF RULEMAKING, TYPES OF FEDERAL
REGULATIONS, AND PAGES IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER 17 (Congressional Research Service Report R43056,
2015), https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43056.pdf (“As the data show, the number of pages has increased since
publication of the Federal Register began. The number of pages reached a peak in 1980 at 87,012 pages;
decreased to 47,418 pages in 1986; then increased again and has been approximately between 65,000 and
85,000 pages for the past two decades.”).
80 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 1212 (“[T]he institutional infrastructure for rulemaking was geared
towards the creation of rules for governing a relatively stable society with less upward mobility and
relatively stable economic and market environments.”).
81 Coffee, supra note 9, at 1019-82; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal, Wake Forest,
supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Ostrom, supra note 9 (The predominance of special
interest groups in the rulemaking process can be temporarily overcome during and after crises when
political entrepreneurs assume the transaction costs of organizing the otherwise disinterested latent groups);
Olson, supra note 9 (Smaller and better-organized special interest groups typically control dispersed
investors and other dominant latent groups in the competition to influence the rulemaking process).
82 Coffee, supra note 9; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra
note 7.
83 Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Kirchner, supra
note 11, at 161-172; Popper, supra note 8.
84 See supra notes 30-55 and accompanying text.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
letters, and finally agency lawyers finalizing a rule after considering the comments85.
This existing rulemaking process often prohibits ex parte communications,86 involves
very little brainstorming, and undermines innovation.87 While rulemakers may be able to
update regulations and regulatory guidance to address regulatory issues created by
disruptive innovation, given the exponential nature of disruptive innovation,88 they are
less able to adequately update existing rules in the present regulatory framework. The
speed of product innovation alone makes formal rulemaking in the existing regulatory
infrastructure challenging. Formal rulemaking is simply too time-consuming.89 The speed
of product innovation makes it possible to bring a new product to market while formal
rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure, taking months and often years of
regulatory procedure, is still dealing with the last product launch. New regulations
pertaining to an innovative product could be obsolete before they are finalized.90
4. Unknown Future Contingencies
The existing regulatory infrastructure with stable and presumptively optimal rules is
85 Lynn E. Blais & Wendy E. Wagner, Emerging Science, Adaptive Regulation, and the Problem of
Rulemaking Ruts, 86 TEX. L. REV. 1701, 1706 (2008) (“[A]gencies systematically engage in excess data
gathering, protracted analysis of the data and associated public comments, and extraordinarily detailed
explanation of the bases and purposes of their final rules in an attempt to insulate their policies from
judicial reversal. . . . This hyperformalization of notice-and-comment rulemaking has several consequences.
The most obvious is the increase in time and resources required to promulgate each rule.”).
86 5 U.S.C. § 557(d)(1) (2012); Ex Parte Communications in Informal Rulemaking Proceedings
(Recommendation 77-3), 1 C.F.R. § 305.77 (2014) (listing other advantages associated with restraining ex
parte communications, including reducing possibility of unfair influence over decision makers and
affording interested parties opportunity to respond to information relied upon in the decisionmaking
process).
87 Peter H. Schuck, When the Exception Becomes the Rule: Regulatory Equity and the Formulation of
Energy Policy Through an Exceptions Process, 1984 DUKE L.J. 163, 197 (1984) (“Hastily prepared,
overbroad rules can be disastrous for those who technically are covered by the rules but to whom the rules
should not, in justice or sound policy, be applied. Inflexible application of such rules may quickly create
grave competitive distortions, perhaps even driving firms out of business before the rules can be refined or
eliminated.”); Blais & Wagner, supra note 85, at 1705 (“Important statutory directives remain
unimplemented years after the deadline for implementation has passed. Agencies are increasingly turning
to even more informal methods--which lack adequate opportunities for public participation and evade
meaningful judicial oversight--to promulgate important policies. And, not surprisingly, agencies are
increasingly reluctant to revisit rules after enactment, even if the factual or policy predicates underlying
them have changed.”).
88 See supra notes 30-55 and accompanying text.
89 Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act Unconstitutional?, 98 MICH. L. REV. 303, 371 (1999) (“With
respect to systematic effects: A great deal of attention has been paid to the phenomenon of the ‘ossification’
of notice-and-comment rulemaking, and indeed a high priority, for the future of administrative law, is to
devise means to overcome the problem. Originally intended as a quick and effective alternative to formal,
on-the-record rulemaking, executive and especially judicial innovations have converted notice-and-
comment rulemaking into an exceptionally time-consuming affair, often consuming many years, frequently
half a decade and more. In fact EPA estimates that informal rulemaking typically takes five years.”);
Thomas O. McGarity, Some Thoughts on "Deossifying" the Rulemaking Process, 41 DUKE L.J. 1385, 1385
(1992) (“Although informal rulemaking is still an exceedingly effective tool for eliciting public
participation in administrative policymaking, it has not evolved into the flexible and efficient process that
its early supporters originally envisioned. During the last fifteen years the rulemaking process has become
increasingly rigid and burdensome.”).
90 Barefoot, supra note 52, at 10.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
largely incapable of addressing the ever-increasing unknown future contingencies
associated with disruptive innovation. Because it lacks anticipatory rulemaking
capabilities, the existing regulatory system addresses regulatory issues only ex-post, if
and when they materialize and if core constituents are sufficiently burdened to precipitate
enough political pressure for lawmakers to act.91 Evidence exists that the suboptimal ex-
post timing of rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure regularly requires
expedited rulemaking that results in suboptimal regulatory outcomes.92 Rulemakers often
discount or willingly accept the suboptimalities of rules associated with unknown future
contingencies. Temporary acceptance of suboptimal rules increases temporary rule
certainty and predictability, but it also precipitates the inevitable need for rule revision,
amendments, and repeals93 In the existing regulatory framework, if and when the
inevitable future contingencies materialize, unveiling suboptimal sets of existing rules,
rulemakers perpetuate a costly and uncertainty-increasing process of rule revisions,
amendments, and repeals to address such shortcomings. Despite its insufficient
anticipatory capabilities and all the downsides that are associated with it, stable and
presumptively optimal rules remain the uniform response to perceived regulatory
issues.94
Given the pace of innovation,95 future contingencies in rulemaking are likely to
substantially increase, making the dynamic anticipation of future contingencies more
important for rulemaking. The current process of rule revisions, amendments, and repeals
to address inevitable shortcomings of stable rules is costly, time-consuming, and cannot,
in our estimation, keep track of future innovations and corresponding regulatory needs.
Exponential innovation has the potential to overwhelm the existing regulatory process
because rulemakers are still attempting to comprehend the regulatory demands of the last
wave of innovative solutions, technologies, and applications while the next wave of
innovation is already in full force.96 In effect, exponential innovation is likely to intensify
91 Id.; see also supra note 3.
92 Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Coffee, supra note 9; Roberta Romano, Regulating in the Dark 1 (Yale
Law & Econ. Research Paper No. 442, 2012), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1974148
(“Foundational financial legislation is typically adopted in the midst or aftermath of financial crises, when
an informed understanding of the causes of the crisis is not yet available. Moreover, financial institutions
operate in a dynamic environment of considerable uncertainty, such that legislation enacted even under the
best of circumstances can have perverse unintended consequences, and regulatory requirements correct for
an initial set of conditions can become inappropriate as economic and technological circumstances change.
Furthermore, the stickiness of the status quo in the U.S. political system renders it difficult to revise
legislation, even though there may be a consensus to do so.”); STEPHEN M. BAINBRIDGE, CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE AFTER THE FINANCIAL CRISIS 269 (2012) (“Just as a ratchet wrench works only in one
direction, the size and scope of government tends to move in only one direction—upwards—because the
interest groups that favored the changes now have an incentive to preserve the new status quo, as do the
bureaucrats who gained new powers and prestige. Hence, each crisis has the effect of ratcheting up the
long-term size and scope of government.”).
93 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 1217 (describing “ex-ante experimentation” in rulemaking).
94 See Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal, Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal and
Lacine 2014, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7.
95 See supra notes 30-55 and accompanying text.
96 Romano, supra note 92, at 1 (“Moreover, financial institutions operate in a dynamic environment of
considerable uncertainty, such that legislation enacted even under the best of circumstances can have
perverse unintended consequences, and regulatory requirements correct for an initial set of conditions can
become inappropriate as economic and technological circumstances change”); Shrupti Shah, Rachel Brody
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
the frequencies of the regulatory sine curve that are recognized by the literature.97
IV. Dynamic Regulation as a Regulatory Supplement
Economists have used the concept of dynamic regulation in the context of innovation
and learning by doing,98 regulation of quality,99 principal-agent and adverse selection
problems,100 and continuing regulatory relationships.101 Dynamic elements in regulation
have previously also been described as “dynamic games,”102 “regulatory dialectic,” and
as a “dynamic adjustment process.”103 The rapid pace of technological developments in
the telecommunications industry necessitated the use of dynamic elements in
regulation.104
The theory of dynamic regulation conceptualizes the study of regulatory phenomena
in relation to preceding and succeeding events, using institution-specific and
decentralized information to facilitate feedback effects for anticipatory rulemaking.105
The dynamic regulatory framework allows rulemaking to overcome the historic
constraints and path dependencies that traditionally focused the rulemaking process on
stable and presumptively optimal rules. Evolving from a historically reactive process
based only on preceding events and driven by the agency and collective-action problems
of rulemaking, rulemaking in a dynamic framework allows for the anticipation of future
innovation trends and associated contingencies.
Shortcomings in the existing rulemaking process106 can be addressed with dynamic
and anticipatory elements in rulemaking.107 The collective action problem of rulemaking,
& Nick Olson, The Regulator of Tomorrow: Rulemaking and Enforcement in an Era of Exponential
Change (2015), http://dupress.com/articles/us-regulatory-agencies-and-technology/ (“Regulators are on the
front lines of nearly every controversy resulting from a new technology—either being told to get out of the
way or being called upon for solutions when incidents arise. Data breaches, 3D-printed guns, clashes
between taxis and ridesharing services, and many other events that make news headlines also pose real
challenges to regulators. In a fast-moving and increasingly complex world, regulators are finding it harder
and harder to balance the need to protect citizens and fair markets with the need to avoid impeding
innovation.”).
97 Kaal Wake Forest, supra note 7; Coffee, supra note 9.
98 See Tracy R. Lewis & Huseyin Yildirim, Learning by Doing and Dynamic Regulation, 33 RAND J.
ECON. 22, 23–24 (2002) (“Innovation is more rapid when current service is increased, enabling the supplier
to accelerate his rate of learning.”).
99 Stephane Auray et al., Dynamic Regulation of Quality, 42 RAND J. ECON. 246, 246 (2011).
100 JOHN M. LITWACK, DYNAMIC REGULATION, DEMAND INFORMATION AND MARKET PRICES (1992).
101 David P. Baron & David Besanko, Commitment and Fairness in a Dynamic Regulatory Relationship, 54
REV. ECON. STUD. 413, 413 (1987); David P. Baron & David Besanko, Regulation and Information in a
Continuing Relationship, 1 INFO. ECON. & POL’Y 267, 267 (1984).
102 Edward J. Kane, Extracting Nontransparent Safety Net Subsidies by Strategically Expanding and
Contracting a Financial Institution’s Accounting Balance Sheet, 36 J. FIN. SERV. RES. 161, 161 (2009).
103 Edward J. Kane, Interaction of Financial and Regulatory Innovation, 78 AM. ECON. REV. 328, 333
(1988) (“The regulatory dialectic posits a dynamic adjustment process that in the long run enforces a ‘law
of one regulatory burden.’" Precisely because inefficient patterns of regulation impose excessively
burdensome costs either on regulatees, their customers, or the general taxpayer, the burdened parties must
be expected sooner or later to develop avoidance strategies by which to throw these burdens aside.”).
104 See supra note 16.
105 See Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7; Kaal in Liber Amicorum Peter Nobel, supra note 7; Kaal, Wake
Forest, supra note 7; Kaal and Lacine 2014, supra note 7.
106 See supra notes 49-55.
107 Kaal Wake Forest, supra 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
problems associated with trial-and-error rulemaking, and problems associated with
regulatory cycles derive largely from the nature of stable and presumptively optimal
rules.108 Rulemaking with dynamic elements increases the use of institution-specific,
decentralized, and timely information109 to allow for adaptive rulemaking. Adaptive
rulemaking helps overcome the collective action problem of rulemaking because with
fewer stable rules latent majority groups and dominant minority groups have fewer
opportunities to influence the continuously and timely adapting rulemaking process.
Similarly, regulatory cycles and trial-and-error rulemaking become less prevalent because
adaptive rulemaking processes supplement stable rules with adaptive capabilities that
make rule revisions less prevalent and minimize trial-and error rulemaking.
Feedback effects are an integral part of dynamic forms of regulation.110 Feedback
effects are described in the theory of lawmaking as rulemakers’ reactions to institutional
change111 or private actors’ reactions and counteractivities to institutional constraints.112
A dynamic regulatory framework facilitates feedback effects that help enhance the
availability of institution-specific and decentralized information to support the
rulemaking process.113 Feedback effects can occur in several settings including intra- and
interjurisdictional feedback processes, feedback processes between outcomes and
institutions, feedback processes between different public and private rulemakers, and
feedback processes between rules and rulemaking processes.114 Competition between
legislators and regulators from different jurisdictions can facilitate interjurisdictional
108 The collective action problem of rulemaking, inherent in smaller and better-organized interest groups
and dominant latent groups competing to influence the rulemaking process, pervades when regulatory
outcomes are stable. Regulatory cycles, inherent in existing rule adoption, revisions, and revocations,
derive from stable and presumptively optimal rules that cannot timely adapt to future contingencies and
corresponding regulatory needs. Trial-and-error-rulemaking is necessitated if rules are presumptively
optimal and stable. Trial-and-error-rulemaking could become obsolete if dynamic elements in rulemaking
processes systematically anticipated future contingencies and corresponding regulatory needs.
109 Information on the functioning of financial institutions, information pertaining to how financial
institutions, or decision makers in financial institutions, actually act and how they are expected to react to
unforeseen contingencies in the future helps incorporate dynamic elements into financial regulation.
Several mechanisms can increase the information for rulemaking in a more timely fashion, including but
not limited to: (1) contingent capital, (2) governmental contracts in the form of non-and deferred
prosecution agreements, (3) venture capital finance allocation, and (4) crowdfunding. See supra note 7.
110 See supra note 7.
111 Jean-Jacques Dethier, Governance and Economic Performance: A Survey 49 (Discussion Papers on
Development Policy No. 5, Center for Development Research, Bonn, April 1999), http://goo.gl/xzHwxK.
112 Christian Kirchner, Market Organizations: A New-Institutional Perspective, 151 J. INST. THEORETICAL
& ECON. 260, 265 (1995) (“By introducing various examples of the way in which private actors have tried
to escape the onerous results of regulation, and showing that law courts often have favoured such
‘inventions,’ the paper developed a hypothesis of how public and private actors act and react in the
complex process of forming the institutional arrangements of market.”).
113 Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7, at 1214 (“Rules can be adaptable if institutions and rulemaking
processes integrate dynamic elements that produce timely, relevant, and decentralized information for
rulemaking.”).
114 Rules as outcomes are the result of the institutional design of rulemaking and reinforce the institutional
design. Existing rules create a feedback effect for the rulemaking process itself. Rules with suboptimal
characteristics are the results of institutional arrangements and reinforce suboptimal institutional
arrangements and rulemaking processes. Stable and presumptively optimal rules reinforce a rulemaking
process with an institutional structure that perpetuates stable elements in rules.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
feedback processes.115 The unrestricted exchange of information between public- and
private rulemakers can create regulatory synergies that increase the availability of
relevant, decentralized, and timely information for rulemaking116 and facilitate feedback
effects.117 Existing rules can provide feedback effects for the rulemaking process itself.
Through feedback effects, rulemakers in a dynamic regulatory framework can adopt rules
that are adaptable to future states of the world.
Feedback processes in a dynamic regulatory framework facilitate the
enhancement of information for regulation. Dynamic regulatory tools as a regulatory
supplement enable rulemakers to adapt to regulatory contingencies if and when they arise
because a feedback effect provides relevant, timely, decentralized, and institution-specific
information ex-ante. By increasing the availability of information ex-ante, dynamic
regulatory tools help lower unforeseen contingencies in the rulemaking process.
Improved information for rulemaking also helps maintain certainty in the rulemaking
process.
Dynamic elements in rulemaking can help optimize the timing of rule enactment.
A core problem for most regulation is its inaccurate and delayed timing. Because of the
collective action problem of regulation, path dependencies, and political inertia, among
many other reasons, regulation is mostly reactive, following business cycles, and not
preemptive, e.g., enacted before crises when governance improvements are most
needed.118 Instead of the traditional rule revisions ex-post after rules have emerged as
suboptimal, feedback effects in dynamic regulatory processes can increase the
115 Including synergies and exchanges between public rulemakers and public regulators as well as
intrajurisdictional feedback processes between private and public rulemakers in a given jurisdiction.
Christian Kirchner et al., Regulatory Competition in EU Corporate Law After Inspire Art: Unbundling
Delaware’s Product for Europe, 2 EURO. COMPANY & FIN. L. REV. 159 (2015); Kirchner et al.,
Europäischer vs. US-amerikanischer Wettbewerb der Gesellschaftsrechte - Abschied vom alten Delaware-
Verbundprodukt. Die Aktiengesellschaf, 13 DIE AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT 469 (2012).
116 Private rulemakers can have a comparative advantage over public rulemakers because, unlike their
public counterparts, they often can produce necessary, comparable, decentralized, and institution-specific
information for rulemaking. Unlike public rulemakers, private rulemakers often have access to
decentralized information and can more readily react to emerging, decentralized, and institution-specific
information. Interaction between public rulemakers and private rulemakers, including the exchange of
emerging information, creates a feedback process between them that increases the availability, timeliness,
and quality of information available to the public rulemaker. Based on the optimized information for
rulemaking, the public rulemaker can take regulatory action when the relevant information for rulemaking
becomes available. The interplay between public and private rulemakers and the associated feedback
process enables a learning process and optimization process for the public rulemaker.
117 Id. The rulemaking process is enhanced through the competition between private- and public
rulemakers. Competition between different public rulemakers can require public rulemakers to meet
consumers’ and legal addressees’ quality expectations and preferences. Consumer choice can add a
dynamic element to the rulemaking process because public rulemakers in a given jurisdiction can adjust
rulemaking to consumer choice once consumers have opted out of a suboptimal regulatory regime in that
jurisdiction. Consumer choice creates a feedback effect for the public rulemaker. It can thus facilitate
appropriate information for rulemaking and enable anticipation and modification of the public rulemaker’s
next action in the rulemaking process. Feedback effects may exist between public rulemakers and parties
who are subject to informal rules if public rulemakers observe the preferences and efficient solutions of
parties who are subject to informal rules. In effect, parties who are subject to informal rules are signaling
their preferences and efficient solutions to the public rulemaker. Public rulemakers can benefit from the
additional insights such signaling may produce for the public rulemaking process.
118 See supra text accompanying notes 70–72
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
availability of relevant information for rulemaking ex-ante and anticipate necessary
revisions before rules emerge as suboptimal.119 By identifying possible contingencies and
necessary rule revisions with optimized information ex-ante, dynamic regulatory
supplements make adaptive rulemaking the focal point for rulemaking in a dynamic
framework.120
Industries and regulatory agencies can benefit from dynamic regulation as a
regulatory supplement, an informal and flexible approach to regulatory issues. While the
Administrative Procedure Act (APA)121 institutes regulatory procedures to protect
regulated industries,122 requiring a full rulemaking process to apply,123 industries and
regulatory agencies often prefer unenforceable rules and no judicial involvement.124 Both
industries and regulators are affected by costly, untimely, overextended, and ossified
rulemaking or adjudicative procedures and the associated regulatory uncertainty.125
Dynamic regulatory supplements would not violate mandated regulatory procedures in
the APA126 as the full lawmaking process still applies.127 Dynamic regulation functions as
a regulatory supplement to help optimize the existing rulemaking process.
V. Data as Input for Dynamic Regulation
The data used for this study provides general guidance on innovation trends. The
venture capital (VC) investment allocation in the deals encapsulated by the dataset
provides a window to the market for innovative products. The VC investments result
from VC deal flow screening. Venture capital’s assessment of innovative products and
initiatives generates institution- and industry-specific decentralized information on
innovation trends. While deal flow, that is, the totality of potential deals and business
plans screened by venture capitalists, would provide an optimal assessment of innovation
trends, deal flow data is not available. We therefore use venture capital investment
allocations to assess innovation trends. To illustrate venture capital’s ability to identify
innovation trends, we use a PitchBook Data, Inc. dataset on venture capital deals in the
United States. The dataset comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies from
2005 through 2015. It includes all VC deals and all VC stages.
Figure 1 below shows that since 2009 the number of VC deals and the total
capital invested increased substantially from around $30 billion in total capital invested to
around $80 billion invested. This increase illustrates VC investors’ attempts to capitalize
on increasing innovation in multiple industries.
119 Kaal, Wake Forest, supra note 7; Kaal in FS Kirchner, supra note 7.
120 Id.
121 Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559, 701-06 (2012).
122 See 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559 (2012).
123 In the typical process, the APA requires that for a rule to become effective, the proposed rule must go
through what is known as notice-comment rulemaking, often a lengthy process in which the public is given
an opportunity to comment on the proposed rule, and the agency must consider such comments before
promulgating a final regulation. 5 U.S.C. § 553(b), (c) (2012).
124 Wu, supra note 22, at 1843 (“Both agency and industry will sometimes share an interest in an informal
and flexible regime that resembles an unenforceable ‘letter of intent’ in the world of private contracts. The
costs of a slow-moving, ossified rulemaking or adjudicatory procedure, with its accompanying uncertainty
and litigation costs, fall on both industry and agency.”).
125 McGarity, supra note 89, at 1387-96.
126 Administrative Procedure Act, 5 U.S.C. §§ 551-559, 701-706 (2012).
127 Supra note 124.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction; Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All
HOW STe O ri eRs; E L G o U ca L t A io T n E s: DUn IS it R ed U S P t T a I t V es E ; SIN ea N rc O h V H A Q T O IO n N ly ;– FROM FACTS TO DATA
Table Filters: no filters
Capital Invested & Deal Count
$90.00B 14,000
12,870
$80.34B
$80.00B
11,099 $ 69.65B1 0,929 12,000
$70.00B
10,000
8,951
$60.00B
$50.00B $4 7 4 ,3 .5 2 5 4 B $45.25B 8,000
$41.38B
5,951
$40.00B $35.98B$ 36.78B 6,000
4,847 4,841 $32.41B
$28.76B 4,409 $27.74B
$30.00B
$23.64B 3,325 4,000
2,962
$20.00B
2,000
$10.00B
$0.00M 0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Total Capital Invested Deal Count
Figure 1: VC CapitaTl iImnvees tPede arniod dD e(a1l2 C o Yuneta, Ursn)ited States, 2005-2015. TShoeu dracteas: ePt ictocTmhoBptroaisole ksC D7a7ap,5tai0t,8a I ldn ecIna.l vs ested
involving 37,298 co2m0p0a5nies. Data provided by PitchBook. $23.64B
2006 $28.76B
2007 $35.98B
2008 $36.78B
2009 $27.74B
2010 $32.41B
2011 $44.55B
2012 $41.38B
2013 $45.25B
2014 $69.65B
2015 $80.34B
1. VC Deal Characteristics
Figure 2 below shows that since 2010 both the early stage and late stage venture
capital internal rate of return (IRR) has been positive and increasing steadily across
different VC stages and overall. Figure 2 covers several relevant VC stages, giving us
the opportunity to determine which stage we can best focus on for purposes of identifying
more optimal VC investment allocation signals for rulemaking.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
25.00%
20.00%
15.00%
10.00%
5.00%
0.00%
-5.00%
-10.00%
Venture Capital
-15.00%
Venture Capital -
Early Stage
-20.00%
Venture Capital -
Later Stage
-25.00%
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Figure 2: VC Fund IRR by VC Fund Type, 2005-2015. Dataset consists of 6,157 VC funds from 2005-2015.
Data provided by PitchBook.
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Figure 3 below shows that since 2014 the latest round of VC investment in our dataset
(19th Round) has become increasingly important. This could suggest that some of the
established innovative products are continuing to receive VC financing rather than new
startups. However, early stage and angel investments also show an increase starting in
2011 as compared with the overall VC rounds in our dataset.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction;
Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
Table Filters: no filters
HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Capital Invested by VC Round Value 1: Total Capital Invested Organized By: VC Round Time Period: 12 Years
$90.00B
19th Round
18th Round
$80.00B
17th Round
16th Round
$70.00B
15th Round
14th Round
$60.00B
13th Round
12th Round
$50.00B
11th Round
10th Round
$40.00B
9th Round
8th Round
$30.00B
7th Round
6th Round
$20.00B
5th Round
4th Round
$10.00B
3rd Round
2nd Round
$0.00M
1st Round
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Angel
Figure 3: VC Capital Invested by VC Round, United States, 2005-2015. Dataset comprisSeso u77rc,5e0: 8P ditecahlsB ook Data, Inc.
involving 37,298 companies. Data provided by PitchBook.
VC Round 2005 2006
Angel $297.0M $348.4M
1st Round $5.27B $6.04B
2nd Round $5.97B $6.49B
3rd Round $4.91B $6.42B
4th Round $3.22B $3.67B
5th Round $2.13B $2.73B
6th Round $690.3M $1.89B
Figures 4, 5, and 6 below show that most industries in the dataset are substantially
7th Round $396.9M $641.5M
represented up to Series F. Big Data applications and SaaS are disproportionally high
8th Round $343.6M $95.2M
represented in Series I to K. The rest of the industries represented up to Series F play no
9th Round $282.2M $245.1M
or a much less significant role in Series I to K. This data seems to suggest that VC funds
perceive B1i0gth D Raotau nadnd SaaS as the most promising businesses applications that justi$f1y3 .2M
continuing11 itnhv Resotumndents. Additionally, Table 1 shows that among the Top 25 compa$n0ie.2s8 M
by highes1t 2VthC R soeurineds investment deals involving SaaS and Big Data are among the top
represente1d3 tihn dRuosutnryd verticals. This data is consistent with the rest of the data in Figures
8-11 below. A more granular assessment of the VC investments in Big Data and SaaS can
provide much needed feedback for regulators on associated regulatory needs.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Figure 4: VC Investments by Periods/Stages and Industry from 2005 through 2015. Periods/stages include
Seed and Series A through Series K. Industries represented include: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data,
CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech, Fin Tech, Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences,
LOHAS and Wellness, Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security, and
Wearables. The following ratios are calculated by dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the
cumulative deals from 2005 through 2015. Data provided by PitchBook.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Figure 5: VC Investments by Periods/Stages and Industry from 2005 through 2015. Periods/Stages include
Seed and Series A through Series K. Industries represented include: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data,
CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech, Fin Tech, Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences,
LOHAS and Wellness, Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security, and
Wearables. The following ratios are calculated by dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the
cumulative deals from 2005 through 2015. Data provided by PitchBook.
Figure 6: VC Deal/Dollar Investment Ratios, Stage/Series by Industry Vertical from 2005-2015 and VC
Investments for the Following Periods/Stages: Seed and Series A through Series K. Pitchbook provides data
for the following industries: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data, CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech, Fin Tech,
Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences, LOHAS and Wellness, Manufacturing,
Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security, and Wearables. The ratios are calculated by
dividing capital invested sum by the deal count for the cumulative deals from 2005 through 2015. Data
provided by PitchBook.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Company Industry Current Deal Date % Acquired VC Series Total Year
Name Vertical Financing Round Invested Founded
Status Equity
Palantir Big Data, SaaS Venture 12/13/2015 4.29 12th Series K 880 2004
Technologies Capital-Backed Round
Palantir Big Data, SaaS Venture 11/3/2014 6.91 10th Series I 635.71 2004
Technologies Capital-Backed Round
Palantir Big Data, SaaS Venture 11/26/2014 0.33 11th Series J 400 2004
Technologies Capital-Backed Round
Motricity Mobile Corporate 12/31/2007 20.11 9th Round Series I 185 2001
Backed or
Acquired
Onconova Life Sciences, Private Equity- 8/10/2012 10th Series J 50 1998
Therapeutics Oncology Backed Round
(ONTX)
Tocagen Life Sciences, Venture 10/21/2015 12.98 9th Round Series H 46.2 2007
Oncology Capital-Backed
TherOx Life Sciences Venture 7/21/2005 58.68 9th Round Series I 40.8 1994
Capital-Backed
Revolution Venture 11/19/2015 11.85 12th Series I 35.22 2006
Foods Capital-Backed Round
Alien Internet of Venture 3/12/2007 15.55 12th Series I 33 1994
Technology Things, Capital-Backed Round
Manufacturing
OptiScan Venture 4/14/2010 11th Series I 31.5 1994
Biomedical Capital-Backed Round
BioNumerik Life Sciences, Private Equity- 3/12/2009 10th Series K 30 1995
Pharmaceuticals Oncology Backed Round
TherOx Life Sciences Venture 2/20/2008 28.33 10th Series J 29.99 1994
Capital-Backed Round
Alien Internet of Venture 3/12/2007 15.89 11th Series I 28.47 1994
Technology Things, Capital-Backed Round
Manufacturing
Onconova Life Sciences, Private Equity- 7/18/2012 9th Round Series I 26.44 1998
Therapeutics Oncology Backed
(ONTX)
Allconnect Venture 2/21/2007 10.08 11th Series I 20 1998
Capital-Backed Round
NeuroPace Life Sciences, Venture 7/8/2013 3.91 6th Round Series I 18.05 1997
LOHAS & Capital-Backed
Wellness
AFS Private Equity- 8/29/2008 3rd Round Series I 13 1985
Technologies Backed
Agraquest Life Sciences, Formerly VC- 1/1/2009 11.32 13th Series J 10.2 1995
Manufacturing Backed Round
Agraquest Life Sciences, Formerly VC- 6/18/2009 6.56 12th Series I 10.13 1995
Manufacturing Backed Round
CafePress E-Commerce Venture 11/24/2008 1.39 3rd Round Series I 8.3 1999
(PRSS) Capital-Backed
Agraquest Life Sciences, Formerly VC- 3/25/2011 6.89 14th Series K 7.5 1995
Manufacturing Backed Round
Exa (EXA) Formerly VC- 5/21/2008 5.79 8th Round Series I 6 1991
Backed
Iconix Manufacturing Venture 1/24/2007 3.95 10th Series I 4 1997
Biosciences Capital-Backed Round
Iconix Manufacturing Venture 12/18/2006 2.06 9th Round Series I 2 1997
Biosciences Capital-Backed
OptiScan Venture 7/2/2010 12th Series J 0.7 1994
Biomedical Capital-Backed Round
Table 1: Top 25 Companies by Highest VC Series Investment. Data provided by PitchBook.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
2. Industries Represented
Figure 7 shows that the average number of deals of the top 25 United States
venture capital investors between 2005 and 2015 focuses on information technology,
mobile technology, and software as a service (SaaS). While the data in Figure 7 arguably
only confirms media reporting on innovation trends between 2005 and 2015, the VC data
used herein may provide earlier signals for regulators to identify possible areas of
regulatory need in the face of increasingly disruptive innovation.
Figure 7: Sector/Industry Allocations (both number of deals and deal size) for the Top 25 United States
Venture Capital Investors between 2005 and 2015. Investors include the following: Y Combinator, 500
Startups, Techstars, SV Angel, New Enterprise Associates, Western Technology Investment, Intel Capital,
Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, Sequoia Capital, Andreessen Horowitz, GV, Plug and Play Ventures, First
Round Capital, Accel Partners, Khosla Ventures, Draper Fisher Jurvetson, Individual Investors, David
McClure, Greylock Partners, MassChallenge, General Catalyst Partners, Lerer Hippeau Ventures, Bessemer
Venture Partners, National Science Foundations, Lightspeed Venture Partners. Data provided by PitchBook.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Figure 8 shows that since 2014 VC deals in the United States increasingly focused on
information technology. While this confirms the trends suggested in Figure 7, and
Figures 7 and 8 together arguably only confirm media reporting on innovation trends
Search Criteria: Deal Status: Completed; Deal Date: From: 01-Jan-2005, To: 31-Dec-2015; Deal Option: Search on a full transaction;
from 2005 throDuegahl T2y0pe1s5: ,A tllh VeC V SCtag desa;t aA lul Rsoeudn hd eNrueminb,e rasn; dA lle Ssepreiecsi;a Llolyca ati omnso: rUen giterda nSutaltaers ; Search HQ Only;
examTianblaet Fioiltner so:fn toh feil tderasta by regulators, may provide earlier signals for regulators to
identify possible areas of regulatory need in the face of increasingly disruptive
innovation.
Capital Invested by Primary Industry Sector Value 1: Total Capital Invested Organized By: Primary Industry Sector Time Period: 12 Years
$90.00B
$80.00B
$70.00B
$60.00B Materials & Resources
Informa@on Technology
$50.00B
Healthcare
$40.00B
Financial Services
$30.00B Energy
B2C
$20.00B
B2B
$10.00B
$0.00M
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
Figure 8: VC Capital Invested by Primary Industry, United States, 2005-2015. Dataset comprises 77,508
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
deals involving 37,298 companies. Data provided by PitchBook.
Primary Industry Sector 2005 2006
B2B $2.29B $2.95B
B2C $1.73B $2.62B
Energy $373.8M $1.54B
Financial Services $519.8M $379.1M
Healthcare $6.96B $8.41B
Information Technology $11.46B $12.70B
Materials & Resources $319.5M $148.5M
$23.64B $28.74B
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Figure 9 shows that between 2006 and 2013, VC investment allocations focused on
applications in the context of the Internet of Things. Since 2010, however, both SaaS and
Wearables have taken over the primary focus in VC investments in this dataset. This is
coSnesairscthe Cnrtit ewriai:thD eFali gStuartuess: C7o amnpdle t8ed. ;T Dheael Dmataei:n F rpoomi:n 0t1 -hJaenr-e2 0i0s5 ,t hToa:t 3 a1- Dmeco-r2e0 1g5;r aDneaul lOaprt ieoxn:a Smeairncaht oion na full transaction;
Deal Types: All VC Stages; All Round Numbers; All Series; Locations: United States; Search HQ Only;
of these trends can provide guidance to regulators to help identify possible areas of
Table Filters: no filters
regulatory need in the face of increasingly disruptive innovation.
Capital Invested by Industry Vertical Value 1: Total Capital Invested Organized By: Industry Vertical Time Period: 12 Years
$120.00B
Wearables & Quan;fied Self
Security
$100.00B
SaaS
Robo;cs and Drones
$80.00B
Oncology
Nano-technology
$60.00B
Mobile
Marke;ng Tech
$40.00B
Manufacturing
LOHAS & Wellness
$20.00B
Life Sciences
Internet of Things
$0.00M
Infrastructure
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
HealthTech
Source: PitchBook Data, Inc.
Figure 9: VC capital invested by industry vertical United States 2005-2015. Dataset comprises 77,508 deals
involving 37,298I ncodmupsatnriyes V. Derattaic parlovided by PitchBook. 2005 2006
3D Printing $4.0M $0.20M
AdTech $343.0M $698.3M
Big Data $204.8M $403.2M
CleanTech $559.6M $1.47B
E-Commerce $654.3M $658.9M
EdTech $51.8M $71.6M
Fin Tech $240.9M $346.5M
HealthTech $171.3M $236.5M
Infrastructure $29.5M $157.4M
Internet of Things $380.4M $401.7M
Life Sciences $3.73B $4.08B
LOHAS & Wellness $210.4M $461.3M
Manufacturing $2.71B $3.72B
Marketing Tech $394.8M $435.9M
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Figure 10 shows the relative impact of VC investments by industry. This data
examination is included to suggest that using investment ratios by industry, among other
more granular examinations of trends, can help inform rulemakers on innovation and the
corresponding need for rulemaking.
Industry Totals
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 All
3D Prin<ng AdTech
BigData CleanTech
E-Commerce EdTech
FinTech HealthTech
Infrastructure Internet of Things
Life Sciences LOHAS & Wellness
Manufacturing Marke<ng Tech
Mobile Nano-technology
Oncology Robo<cs and Drones
SaaS Security
Wearables & Quan<fied Self
Figure 10: VC Investment Ratio by Industry. The investment ratio is calculated as VC investment amount
divided by VC deals per year and industry. Dataset comprises 77,508 deals involving 37,298 companies.
Data provided by PitchBook.
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
Figure 11 shows that the majority of VC investments in the majority of industries
represented are later stage VC investments, following early seed VC investments in the
same industries. This data may be interpreted and perhaps discounted as VCs simply
following up with later stage investments in companies they had invested seed capital in
at an earlier stage. Accordingly, the data could suggest risk-averse behavior by VC funds.
At the same time, however, VC funds are not likely to continue with later stage
investments if contractual performance obligations/thresholds of their portfolio
companies were not fulfilled to a substantial degree.
Figure 11: VC Deal Type Ratios by Industry Vertical and Periods/Stages, 2005-2015:
Pre/Accelerator/Incubator, Angel, Seed, Early Seed VC, Later Stage VC, Restart Angel, Restart Early Stage,
and Restart Late Stage. Pitchbook provides data for the following industries: 3d Printing, AdTech, Big Data,
CleanTech, E-Commerce, EdTech, Fin Tech, Health Tech, Infrastructure, Internet of Things, Life Sciences,
LOHAS and Wellness, Manufacturing, Marketing, Mobile, Nano, Oncology, Robotics, SaaS, Security and
Wearables. The data runs from 2005 through 2015. The following ratios are calculated by dividing capital
invested sum by the deal count for the cumulative deals between 2005 through 2015. Data provided by
PitchBook.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
VI. Venture Capital as Dynamic Regulation of Disruptive Innovation
VC capital allocations are a potential treasure trove of valuable information for
regulators. While VC capital allocations offer only one among other possible ways for
regulators to identify areas that may require their attention in the future and facilitate
anticipatory rulemaking, the data analysis in this study shows that venture capitalists’
finance allocation and the implicit assessment of innovative products, businesses, and
initiatives generates highly relevant institution- and industry-specific decentralized
information on innovation trends. As such, venture capitalists’ innovation-driven finance
allocation can provide feedback on innovation trends for regulators and rulemakers,
optimize the timing of regulation, and facilitate anticipatory rulemaking. Venture
capitalists’ investment allocations can provide regulators and rulemakers with a
measurement of risks associated with innovative developments as well as the economic
opportunities associated with such innovation.
The VC finance allocation can create feedback effects for dynamic regulation of
innovation. The theory of lawmaking describes feedback effects as rulemakers’ reactions
to institutional change or private actors’ reactions and counteractivities to institutional
constraints. This paper shows that data on VC finance allocation can distill institutional
changes of companies that received VC financing. As such, the regulators’ reaction to
institutional change could be informed by VC financing allocations. VC feedback effects
provide relevant, timely, decentralized, and institution-specific information ex-ante.
VC’s finance allocations can help optimize the timing of rulemaking. A core
problem for regulation of disruptive innovation is inaccurate and delayed timing.128
Regulation is mostly reactive, following business cycles, rather than proactive. Data on
VC investments allows regulators to see where innovation trends are going and the
possible risks they entail before disruptive innovation materializes. Should regulators
consider data on VC investments and their possible implications for disruptive innovation
in rulemaking processes or legislative proposals, it is conceivable that the identification
of disruptive innovation and associated legal concerns could be addressed in a more
timely fashion. By identifying possible contingencies and necessary rule revisions with
optimized information from VC investments ex-ante, before disruptive innovation creates
regulatory issues, regulators could anticipate regulatory needs.
Venture capitalists’ innovation-driven finance allocations can facilitate
anticipatory rulemaking. Through the feedback effects that are facilitated by venture
capitalists’ finance allocations towards innovative products, rulemakers can obtain timely
and decentralized industry- and entity-specific information that allows them to adapt
rules to anticipate regulatory issues. For instance, information on industry-specific VC
investments allows regulators to anticipate regulatory needs in certain industries that are
associated with the highest levels of disruptive innovation. Disruptive innovation may
here be quantified with the number of VC deals or the VC dollar investments in such
industries. Multiple metrics with VC investment information can be examined. The broad
data on VC investments allows for a detailed analysis of innovation trends with
anticipatory qualities that could be directly utilized by regulators, including, as needed,
on a much more granular level. While this paper does not provide a granular evaluation
of the data, regulators would be able to obtain the relevant innovation data presented
herein and analyze areas of concern or regulatory need more granularly. For instance, a
128 See supra notes 118-120 and accompanying text.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
more granular approach to the data could suggest that regulators and rulemakers should
start taking robotics and drones much more seriously. Figure 12 shows that we have seen
more and more investments in these areas since 2011. Of course, one could argue that the
decrease in investments in the number of the later stage rounds in the United States
indicates that the technological development in this area is stalling. However, a closer
look at the industry shows that companies relocate the later stage development to other
countries due to the regulatory disconnect that exists in the United States.
160.0
140.0
120.0
100.0 Grants
Later stage VC
80.0
Early stage VC
60.0 Seed
Angel
40.0
Pre/Accelerator/Incubator
20.0
.0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
Figure 12: VC Investments in Robotics and Drones in the United States. The total dataset comprises 77,508
deals involving 37,298 companies. Data provided by PitchBook.
Critics may suggest that the market often undervalues venture-capital-financed
innovation in products and ideas. We realize that a trend for venture-capital-financed
technology companies, among others, to stay private129 and market undervaluation of
formerly venture-capital-financed companies130 suggest that the innovation potential
identified by venture-capital-finance allocation may not always be shared by the market
at large. However, our objective in this article is not to discuss the long-term potential of
venture-capital-financed innovation. Rather, we suggest that venture capitalists’
innovation-driven finance allocation can provide feedback for regulators and rulemakers,
optimize the timing of regulation, and facilitate anticipatory rulemaking.
Critics may also suggest that venture-capital-financed innovation is not a reliable
measure of innovation that requires regulatory action. In other words, critics may allege
that even if regulators can acquire the depth of information needed to engage in
129 Nicole Bullock, Gavin Jackson & Jennifer Hughes, Global Listings Drop as Tech Groups Stay Private,
FIN. TIMES, January 2/3 2016, at 9.
130 William R. Kerr & Ramana Nanda, Financing Innovation (Harvard Bus. Sch. Working Paper 15-034),
https://perma.cc/NJ4D-SSP5 (“[M]odel of managerial myopia in which shareholders cannot properly
evaluate investments in long-term innovative projects due to asymmetric information, and therefore
markets tend to undervalue the stocks of companies engaged in such projects.”).
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

HOW TO REGULATE DISRUPTIVE INNOVATION – FROM FACTS TO DATA
anticipatory rulemaking, there may be risk of waste of scarce regulatory resources
because VC funds make many investments, not all of which turn out to be successful.
Moreover, if companies that received VC financing are still incubating, it may be largely
unclear what regulatory issues these companies might raise in practice. First, the use of
VC finance allocation is only one of several evolving data available to identify future
regulatory needs. Second, over time, regulators will have an ever-increasing access to
high-quality, decentralized, and real-time information for rulemaking. If and when
multiple data analyses together point unanimously in the direction of a certain demand
for regulatory action, regulators should take anticipatory measures after cross-validation
and triangulation. Currently no regulatory processes and data evaluation exist that could
facilitate such analyses and anticipatory regulatory action.
VII. Conclusion
This paper adds to increasing evidence that companies that received VC
investments have─and continue to─outrun regulation and regulatory efforts. Companies
that received VC investments drive innovation trends in the United States and abroad.
This paper also shows that the existing regulatory processes are suboptimally equipped to
address the challenges of exponential disruptive innovation. The notice and comment
procedures of the APA131 and the SEC are only some of the examples illustrating the
suboptimal regulatory response rates with regards to regulatory challenges presented by
VC-backed companies and the associated disruptive innovation.
The data presented in this paper shows that VC investment allocation decisions
provide relevant broad and general guidance on innovation trends and associated
regulatory issues. The paper shows that the use of VC investment allocation data can help
facilitate anticipatory regulation associated with disruptive innovation, but it emphasizes
that VC investment allocation data is only one form of the emerging data sources that can
be used as signaling for regulatory process optimization. Other data sources are and may
increasingly become available. With the existing and emerging data and a much more
granular examination of these data trends, regulators can further increase their ability to
examine and anticipate regulatory needs.
131 See supra notes 121-127 and accompanying text.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2808132

