Chapter 17 Hedge Funds and Systemic Risk
WULF A. KAAL
Associate Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law
Director of the Private Investment Fund Institute
TIMOTHY A. KRAUSE
Assistant Professor of Finance, Penn State Erie – The Behrend College
Faculty Advisor, Intrieri Family Student Managed Fund
KEYWORDS: Systemic risk, hedge funds, contagion, regulation, financial stability, leverage,
liquidity
ABSTRACT
The public media and politicians regularly debate the potential for hedge funds to contribute to
systemic risk in financial markets. Because the hedge fund industry experienced substantial
growth since the 1990s, concerns about hedge funds’ systemic risk have increased and
regulators have taken measures to mitigate possible risks associated with these funds. The
chapter summarizes the pre- and post-crisis debate and highlights the post-crisis evidence
about hedge funds’ alleged systemic risk. In particular, the chapter examine evidence about
specific factors surrounding hedge funds’ possible contributions to systemic risk, including risk
management incentives, leverage, liquidity characteristics, regulation, financial stability,
transparency, and their potential to induce and perpetuate market contagion.
INTRODUCTION
The controversy over hedge funds’ alleged systemic risk is bitter and perhaps best illustrated by
how government agencies assess this issue. In the United States after the financial crisis of
2007-2008, the Office of Financial Research (OFR) 2013) identified several activities of private
fund managers that constitute important threats to the financial system, including but not limited
to: (1) “reaching for yield,” which is the potential for funds to lower credit standards to boost
yields in a low interest rate environment;(2) investor “herding” toward the exits during market
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

downturns that may result in frequent or large-scale redemption requests; and (3) “fire sales” of
assets at depressed prices in a liquidity crunch. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) (2011) and
the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) (2013) share the OFR’s
assessment. Reports issued by the OFR, FSB, and IOSCO provide compelling reasons for
designating financial institutions as systemically important. By contrast, the Financial Services
Authority (FSA) (2010) in the United Kingdom concluded in its first comprehensive survey of
London’s private fund industry that the hedge fund industry poses no systemic risk to the
financial system. Despite the mixed evidence produced by government reports on hedge funds’
systemic risk, the majority of post-crisis evidence provided by leading financial economists
suggests that hedge funds may play a role in introducing at least some systemic risk into the
financial system. The results of the post-crisis studies provide regulators with methodologies to
evaluate the extent of these risks and prescribe potential remedies.
This chapter contains three main sections in addition to the introduction. The following
section provides an introduction to the issue of hedge funds’ systemic risk in the wake of the
failure of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in 1997 and the financial crisis of 2007-2008.
A discussion of hedge funds’ systemic risk amplification and mitigation attributes is also
provided, and the section concludes by exploring issues associated with hedge fund regulation
and systemic risk, including private fund transparency under the Dodd-Frank Act, the Financial
Stability Oversight Council, and systemic risk data generated through private investment adviser
registration and disclosures. The second section explores the extensive post-crisis literature on
potential relations among hedge fund activities and systemic risk, as well as the underlying
factors that make hedge fund activities particularly important to academics, regulators, and
market participants. The final section concludes.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

THE DEBATE ON HEDGE FUNDS’ SYSTEMIC RISK
The public’s perception of the possible systemic risk of hedge funds largely drives the debate on
hedge funds’ systemic risk and policy responses. Several core factors drive this perception,
including, most prominently, the growth of the hedge fund industry and the collapse of
prominent hedge funds. Involving the growth of the private fund industry, assets under
management (AUM) at hedge funds grew from $118 billion at the end of 1997 to more than $2.7
trillion by the end of 2014 (BarclayHedge 2016). This change represents a compound annual
growth of 19 percent. According to some estimates, private funds surpassed banks in size and
importance both during and after the financial crisis of 2007-2008. The unprecedented growth in
the private fund industry combined with the low interest rate environment following the Federal
Reserve’s quantitative easing after the financial crisis resulted in private fund managers’
increasingly “reaching for yield.” The use of leverage and complex financial transactions,
including derivatives, to increase private fund advisers’ potential yield further increased private
funds’ systemic risk.
Spectacular hedge fund failures further exacerbate the public’s perception that private
funds pose systemic risk. Such failures include Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM), Marin
Capital, Tiger Capital, and Amaranth Advisors. The financial crisis of 2007-2008 also included
the failures of two Bear Stearns hedge funds that were heavily involved in the market for
collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs) of Bear Stearns Asset Management (BSAM)
subgroups. But some research suggests that private fund advisers are unlikely to trigger a
systemic event because losses in hedge funds are directly absorbed by the multitude of
investors and their equity capital and may actually reduce market volatility (Fung and Hsieh
1997; Stulz 2007; Dixon, Clancy, and Kumar 2012). In the aftermath of LTCM, regulators have
encouraged banks to monitor their hedge fund adviser clients through limitations on leverage
through their counterparty risk management (CCRM) practices (Kambhu, Schuermann, and
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

Stiroh 2007). The lack of financial market repercussions after the Amaranth failure seems to
suggest that this approach has been successful.
The debate on private funds’ systemic risk centers around two major events: the
collapse of LTCM and the financial crisis of 2007–2008. The collapse of LTCM in 1998 and the
bailout orchestrated by the New York Federal Reserve Bank triggered the first wave of scholarly
debate on the systemic risk of private funds. A large part of the literature recognizes that market
events such as the LTCM failure may lead to global financial crises if many highly leveraged
hedge funds with illiquid portfolios are obligors of a small number of major financial institutions
(e.g. Pedersen 2009, Boyson, Stahel, and Stulz 2010, and Ben-David, Franzoni, and Moussawi
2012) These scholars see hedge funds’ pursuit of aggressive investment strategies and a high
level of leverage as the primary combination of factors causing hedge funds’ systemic risk when
combined with adverse fluctuations in market prices that can dry up credit and negatively affect
the market price of collateral. Other scholars including Brown, Hwang, In, and Kim (2013) and
Buraschi, Kosowski, and Trojani (2014) contend that the proliferation of private funds in
combination with their risk/reward profile makes such funds systemically risky. Besides posing a
direct systemic risk by damaging systemically important financial institutions, private funds can
also pose an indirect threat to the financial system by generating liquidity shocks and increasing
market volatility in key markets. Others such as Kambhu et. al. (2007), Sadka (2010), and Teo
(2011) view the combination of leverage and the complexity of private funds’ transactions
employing derivative instruments and non-exchange traded derivative instruments as the main
concerns associated with private funds’ systemic risk.
The financial crisis of 2007-2008 triggered a second major wave of scholarship about the
possible systemic risk implications of private funds. A large part of the post-crisis debate
pertained to the role of the so-called shadow banking system in the financial crisis (e.g.
Bengtsson 2016), European Financial Stability Board 2011). The shadow banking system refers
to private fund advisers creating funds that may function as a close substitute for the money-like
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

liabilities created by banks. Like banks, private fund advisers can provide liquidity to clients and
to financial markets and engage in various forms of liquidity transformation. The vulnerabilities
created by private fund advisers engaging in bank-like activities may have large implications for
financial stability. Given the changing conditions for private funds, additional factors could also
be possible sources of hedge funds’ systemic risk. These factors include redemption risk that
causes sudden reductions in funding to banks and other financial entities, insufficient credit risk
transfer to private fund managers, and contagion through business relationships connecting
private fund managers with their sponsors.
Hedge Funds’ Contributions to the Financial Crisis of 2007-2008
Measuring hedge funds’ contribution to the financial crisis of 2007-2008 has proven difficult.
Although the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) started collecting systemic risk data
on hedge funds in the aftermath of the financial crisis and the enactment of Title IV of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act), no such data
were available before and during the crisis. Because of the hedge-fund industry’s lack of
transparency and preference for secrecy, many of the inferences on possible systemic risk
associated with hedge funds and the financial crisis are circumstantial and/or indirect. Core data
needed but unavailable for the evaluation of hedge funds’ contribution to the financial crisis
include data on hedge fund characteristics such as leverage, counterparty relations, AUM, and
portfolio holdings. Without such data for a substantial time period before the financial crisis,
concluding that hedge funds may have had a role in the financial crisis is circumstantial or
anecdotal. Although indirect measures of hedge funds’ role in the financial crisis and systemic
risk can be extricated from existing data, the shadow banking system of hedge funds and the
lack of sufficient transparency create substantial obstacles to implementing direct measures,
especially without the access to primary sources of data regarding hedge funds before the
crisis.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

In theory and purely anecdotally, several hedge-fund-related factors could have
contributed to the financial crisis. One factor is the growth of the hedge fund industry in
combination with the increasing interconnectedness of global financial markets. In theory, if
hedge funds experience losses, such losses may spread to other financial institutions and could
undermine the stability of the financial system (“contagion”). These theoretical assumptions are,
however, counterbalanced by several practical considerations. First, hedge fund collapses are
rarely sudden but in practice almost always occur in incremental steps over a long time period.
Hedge funds’ risk management practices are typically so evolved that they constitute a major
barrier to systemic shocks. Hedge funds’ counterparties in trades and lenders to hedge funds
can also help prevent large losses that could disrupt the financial system. In fact, evidence also
exists that hedge fund losses that could have affected the overall economy did not occur until
the financial crisis and the recession had been triggered by the mortgage market collapse and
sustained stock market losses (e.g. Fung and Hsieh 1997: Stulz 2007: Dixon, Clancy, and
Kumar 2012).
In the wake of the LTCM failure in 1998 but before the financial crisis of 2007-2008,
regulators sought to determine the causes of hedge funds’ potential systemic failure. In a
speech to the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta in 2006 (Bernanke 2006), former Federal
Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke suggests that a failure to manage counterparty risk was a
primary cause for concern. He expresses concern that this risk was still not being properly
measured and that banks should tie credit terms and conditions to hedge funds’ willingness and
ability to provide transparency. The Securities and Exchange Commission (2003) addresses
these issues in a 2003 report. The U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban
Affairs (2006) also discusses these issues in a comprehensive hearing. The focus of both of
these entities, however, centers more on the issue of hedge fund transparency than on
counterparty risk.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

Shortly thereafter, Stulz (2007) concludes that concerns over hedge funds’ systemic risk
to the economy and the banking system are generally overstated, providing evidence that
hedge funds do not generally create volatility and may instead mitigate market instability.
Investors in hedge funds are generally sophisticated and not subject to the investor suitability
requirements of the SEC and/or the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA). While the
risks to financial institutions are often overstated, liquidity risk remains a serious issue due to the
critical linkages created by over-the-counter credit risk relations.
Hedge Fund’s Systemic Risk Amplification and Mitigation Attributes
Several core hedge fund attributes may both amplify and mitigate systemic risk. Such attributes
include hedge funds’ risk management incentives, leverage, returns, and investment strategies.
Risk-Management Incentives
First and foremost among the perceived systemic risk amplification attributes of hedge funds are
their managers’ risk management incentives. Hedge fund managers are tasked with generating
profitable trading strategies and setting up the right portfolio structure while also managing the
business and minimizing the risks of the fund investments. Arguably, in order to obtain sufficient
returns for their clients, hedge fund managers are incentivized to take disproportionately high
risks in their management strategies, which can translate into proportional systemic risks.
However, because many hedge funds engage in some form of market-neutral arbitrage to
ensure that returns do not depend on the direction of the market, they may implicitly minimize
systemic risk.
Hedge funds’ trading patterns during stock market liquidity crises can also contribute to
systemic risk. Some evidence exists that hedge funds substantially reduce their equity holdings
during stock market crises such as the financial crisis of 2007-2008 (e.g. Aragon and Strahan
2012: Brunnermeier and Pedersen 2009. Driven by investor and lender redemptions and the
need to liquidate positions during the financial crisis, one in four hedge funds sold more than 40
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

percent of its equity portfolio, and the hedge fund industry liquidated about 30 percent of its
stock holdings (Ben-David et. al. 2012).
Leverage
Portfolio leverage is another core amplification factor of hedge funds’ systemic risk. Among
financial intermediaries, the hedge fund industry has traditionally been the most exposed to
leverage. The sophisticated use of leverage is a defining characteristic of the industry as
calibrating the appropriate use of leverage plays a central role in the management of hedge
funds. Leverage not only helps amplify or curtail market risk but also can be employed to take
advantage of market mispricing opportunities, level return volatility desired by investors, and
react to changing market and investment opportunities. Systemic risks associated with hedge
funds’ use of leverage stems from its ability to amplify liquidity losses and contribute to the
overvaluation of assets during bull markets. If hedge funds simultaneously liquidate positions
and reduce leverage, leverage can also increase the risk of a fire-sale externality that increases
systemic risk. Such an externality might occur when a hedge fund needs to sell assets that it
views as drastically undervalued but that it must sell to meet margin calls or redemption
requests. Despite the risks associated with hedge fund leverage, evidence exists that the hedge
fund industry’s exposure to leverage has been relatively modest since the collapse of LTCM in
1998, especially compared with the mean leverage of investment banks and broker/dealers
(Ang, Gorovyy, and Van Inwegen 2011).
Hedge Fund Returns and Investment Strategies
A third attribute that can play a role in hedge funds’ systemic risk concerns the returns
generated by hedge funds. Because hedge funds invest in a broad spectrum of assets and
engage in different strategies, hedge fund returns should not affect their systemic risk. However,
evidence exists that the returns of different hedge fund strategies were more correlated during
the financial crisis of 2007-2008 than before the crisis, suggesting that the hedge fund industry
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

can pose systemic risks despite broad strategy diversification (Boyson et. al. 2010; Ben-David
et. al. 2012).
Hedge funds’ investment strategies can also play a role in hedge funds’ systemic risk
and their potential for contagion. Bekaert, Harvey, and Ng (2005, p. 40) define hedge fund
contagion as the “correlation over and above what one would expect from economic
fundamentals.” Evidence shows that suboptimal hedge fund returns cluster across investment
styles. Because risk factors associated with hedge fund performance cannot explain such
clusters, they can reflect contagion (Boyson et. al. 2010). Others show that hedge funds’ returns
generated with dynamic management styles, such as global macro, emerging markets, and
managed futures funds, among others, are associated with systemic risk (Bali, Brown, and
Caglayan 2012). Hedge funds’ systemic risk can also help explain cross-sectional differences in
hedge fund returns (Brown et al. 2013). The growth of hedge fund replication strategies in
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) may further increase hedge funds’ systemic risks associated
with certain strategies (Ramaswamy 2011).
Hedge Fund Regulation and Systemic Risk
In part to address hedge funds’ alleged systemic risk, Congress enacted the Private Fund
Investment Adviser Registration Act under Title IV of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and
Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (the “Dodd-Frank Act,” “Title IV,” or “PFIARA”) (Dodd-Frank
2010). The Dodd-Frank Act authorized the SEC to promulgate rules requiring registration and
enhanced disclosure for private funds advisers, and facilitating data collection to assess hedge
funds’ systemic risk.
By amending the Investment Advisers Act, PFIARA gave the SEC authority to issue
rules and regulations for the registration of private funds with the SEC, increasing record
keeping and disclosure to close alleged regulatory gaps, and ending speculative trading
practices that may have contributed to the financial crisis of 2007-2008. Under PFIARA, hedge
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

fund advisers with more than $150 million AUM are required to register as investment advisers
and must disclose systemically relevant information to the SEC. PFIARA also authorized the SEC
to collect information from registered hedge fund advisers who are required to file confidential
reports with the SEC containing information related to systemic risk.
Financial Stability Oversight Council
The Dodd-Frank Act created the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to ameliorate the
perceived regulatory weaknesses that contributed to the financial crisis of 2007–2008. The
FSOC is tasked with curtailing the complexity of financial institutions and improving the
coordination among financial regulators. Its supervisory responsibilities include evaluating and
implementing supervisory priorities and principles. The FSOC’s primary purposes include
identifying and remedying insufficient supervision of large non-bank financial institutions,
promoting market discipline, and responding to emerging threats to the stability of the U.S.
financial system. The FSOC’s core duties include identifying regulatory shortcomings that could
pose systemic risk; collecting information on financial firms; making regulatory
recommendations for financial regulators; suggesting regulatory changes to Congress for the
promotion of efficiency, competitiveness, and stability; monitoring the financial system for
potential systemic risks; facilitating information sharing and coordination among financial
regulators; and providing a forum for the resolution of jurisdictional disputes among council
members. The FSOC can request data and analyses from the Office of Financial Research
(OFR) and provide direction to the OFR. The FSOC also has its own permanent staff at the
OFR, tasked with collecting required data on the financial system as well as providing
information and technical expertise.
The FSOC’s powers over hedge funds and other nonbank financial institutions are broad
and unprecedented in U.S. financial regulation. The FSOC has the power to subject hedge
funds to extensive supervision by the Federal Reserve. It can also determine on its own
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

initiative with a two-thirds vote if a hedge fund or other nonbank financial institution is
systemically important.
The Dodd-Frank Act mandates several factors that the FSOC must consider in
determining which entities qualify as a systemically important financial institution (SIFI). Hedge
funds and other investment funds that manage $50 billion or more in aggregate total
consolidated assets could be designated a SIFI. First, the FSOC assesses whether “material
financial distress” at a nonbank financial institution could pose a threat to the stability of the
financial system. Thereafter, in a second step, the FSOC takes into account in its assessment
the nature, size, scope, scale, concentration, interconnectedness, and mix of the activities of the
nonbank financial institution as possible threats to the financial system. Statutory considerations
in determining whether a hedge fund meets either of the two standards include leverage,
liquidity risk and maturity mismatch, size, interconnectedness, substitutability, and existing
regulatory scrutiny. Designating a hedge fund as a SIFI subjects the hedge fund to substantial
additional regulations and requires it to change the way it does business. However, hedge funds
are unlikely to be designated as SIFIs because of the high threshold on AUM.
Systemic Risk Data
In an attempt to fulfill its data collection obligations under Title IV of the Dodd-Frank Act, the
SEC Division of Investment Management adopted Form PF (Private Funds). The reporting
obligations for hedge fund managers in Form PF are intended to enable the FSOC to fulfill its
mandate. Form PF provides the FSOC with information about the private fund industry to enable
it to assess risks in the financial system and support its mandate of designating SIFIs. The SEC
and the Commodities and Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) can use Form PF filings for
investigations and examinations. Title IV authorized the SEC to share Form PF data with
institutions that are also required to maintain confidentiality of Form PF data, including the
FSOC, Congress, courts, federal departments, and self-regulated organizations.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

The SEC takes a tiered approach to Form PF filing requirements. Registered hedge fund
advisers with $150 million in AUM or more at the end of their most recently completed fiscal
year are required to file Form PF. However, smaller hedge fund advisers — those with less than
$1.5 billion AUM — are required to complete and file Form PF annually. Large private fund
advisers — those with at least $1.5 billion AUM — must update their Form PF filings quarterly.
POST-CRISIS EVIDENCE ON THE SYSTEMIC RISK OF HEDGE FUNDS
In the wake of the financial crisis of 2007–2008, the Rand Corporation published an influential
report (Dixon et al. 2012) about the association between hedge funds and systemic risk.
According to the report, about 18 percent of hedge funds ceased operations in 2008, although
little evidence exists that these fund failures contributed to losses at prime brokers or other
financial institutions. Nevertheless, because of increasing correlations among asset returns, the
effects of high leverage, increasing financial interdependence in the global financial system, and
the potential for “contagion,” academics and regulators remain concerned that hedge funds may
contribute to systemic risk.
Brunnermeier (2009) and Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) provide the theoretical
underpinnings that link systemic risks to hedge funds, and their “limits to arbitrage” arguments
stem from the seminal work of Shleifer and Vishny (1997). These models rely on the concept
that speculators’ capital is not unlimited, but rather that their ability to provide liquidity is
dependent on funding, and that this funding can suddenly dry up in periods of financial distress
and lead to liquidity spirals. These spirals can be exacerbated by increased correlations in
security returns, increases in market volatility, and a “flight to quality” by market participants.
Numerous empirical studies seek to examine the efficacy of the theoretical predictions of these
models using actual hedge fund, macroeconomic, market, liquidity, and volatility/correlation
data.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

One strand of post-crisis research on this topic examines the links among liquidity,
hedge funds, and systemic risk. Boyson et al. (2010) use multiple econometric techniques to
provide strong evidence that large adverse shocks to liquidity contribute to hedge fund
“contagion.” They use the definition of contagion from Bekaert et al. (2005, p. 40), which, as
previously noted, is “correlation over and above what one would expect from economic
fundamentals.” They also cite the theoretical motivation of Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009)
that adverse shocks to liquidity can affect speculators’ ability to provide liquidity and may force
them to delever at the worst possible time, which then drives asset prices lower and leads to
further deleveraging. In short, this hypothesis states that market efficiency and liquidity can be
limited by speculators’ access to capital. The empirical results of Boyson et al. do not point to
liquidity risk as a risk factor in hedge fund performance, but they do posit that large shocks to
liquidity do contribute to contagion and to the liquidity spirals hypothesized by Brunnermeier and
Pedersen (2009).
Ben-David et al. (2012) also examine a host of hedge-fund-related variables to conclude
that hedge fund redemptions and margin calls, which are liquidity reducing events, were the
primary drivers of selloffs during the financial crisis of 2007-2008. They demonstrate that hedge
fund investors are three times more likely to withdraw capital during market downturns than are
mutual fund investors. Their evidence shows that funds with higher proportions of institutional
ownership are more likely to make redemptions since they may have a better ability to
recognize potential liquidity problems and act more quickly than individual investors. Consistent
with Boyson et al. (2010), hedge funds’ ability to avoid losses from liquidity runs is hampered by
the limits-to-arbitrage and liquidity arguments of Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009).
Besides liquidity, Adrian, Brunnermeier, and Nguyen (2013) identify several other factors
that contribute to hedge fund tail risk and explain that capital flows and expected returns are
positively related to this risk. These factors include market excess returns, VIX straddle excess
returns, variance swap returns, the repo-treasury rate, carry trade excess returns, the 10-year
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

minus three-month treasury returns, and the 10-year corporate/treasury spread. They also
demonstrate that hedge fund managers may be incentivized to increase their exposure to these
factors since they often increase both management and incentive fees. Their study is closely
related to that of Billio, Getmansky, and Pelizzon (2010), who also identify liquidity and three
other factors (i.e., market, credit, and volatility risks) related to hedge fund risk but change
depending on the state of the equity market. Using a regime switching model to estimate
whether the S&P 500 Index is in an up, down, or tranquil regime, they demonstrate that their
risk factors apply most strongly when the market is in a down state.
Billio, Getmansky, Lo, and Pelizzon (2012) estimate econometric measures of
connectedness and systematic risk in two ways. First, they use principal components analysis
(PCA) to demonstrate that hedge fund return volatility is sensitive to risks in the financial
system, but much less so than are brokers, banks, and insurance companies. However, in a
series of nonlinear Granger-causality tests of return volatility, they find that volatility between
2001 and 2008 is transmitted across all parts of the system, including from hedge funds to
brokers and banks.
In a study that directly seeks to quantify the contribution of hedge funds to systemic risk,
Brown et al. (2013) use marginal expected shortfall (MES), a measure of downside tail risk or
downside beta. They find a positive and significant relation between systemic risk and hedge
fund returns since MES predicts fund returns and covariances during the financial crisis. The
authors conclude that investors demand a premium to carry tail risk during systemic events, and
they also imply that hedge fund managers are incentivized to take risks with systematic
exposures, consistent with Adrian et al. (2013).
Brandon and Wang (2013) also examine the liquidity risk of hedge funds, finding that
when incorporating liquidity risk into the analysis of the returns of hedge funds, the superior
performance of funds that incorporate predictability in managerial skills disappears. Their
analysis is rooted in the studies of Avramov and Wermers (2006) and Avramov, Kosowski, Naik,
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

and Teo (2011). Avramov and Wermers find that predictability in mutual fund management
skills, as measured by historical performance against various market and industry benchmarks
as well as business cycle variables, is the dominant source of outperformance, especially during
down markets. Their proposed framework is generally applicable to investment decisions in real
time, including those of hedge funds. Avramov et al. thus apply this approach directly to hedge
funds and find the similar result that predictability in managerial skills is once again the most
important source of outperformance. Brandon et al. extend these results by incorporating the
effect of liquidity risk into the analysis. They find that the outperformance previously attributed to
predictability in managerial skills disappears in hedge fund portfolios when accounting for
liquidity risk.
Teo (2011) also examines the issue of liquidity risk and finds results that are compatible
with the liquidity funding hypothesis of Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009). Specifically, he
examines the issue of whether funds that allow redemptions on a monthly basis or sooner
experience greater losses, challenging the assumption that redemption policies of hedge funds
are irrelevant. In contrast, Teo finds that the rewards to liquidity risk are positive in part because
redemption gates help hedge funds avoid asset fire sales.
In the same vein, Sadka (2010) finds that hedge funds with returns strongly related to
liquidity risk outperform those that are not. Specifically, he finds that variations in systemic
liquidity affect hedge fund performance. He measures the covariation of fund returns with
unexpected changes in aggregate liquidity to the cross-section of hedge fund returns. Funds
that are sensitive to liquidity risk outperform other funds by about 6 percent annually, and are
independent of lockup and redemption periods. Thus, Sadka concludes that systematic liquidity
variations are important to the evaluation of hedge fund performance. Billio, Frattarolo, and
Pelizzon. (2016) develop several measures of tail risk as well and show that all hedge funds
contribute to the downside risk of a portfolio of hedge funds, mainly due to their exposures to
liquidity and credit risks. Even funds that are dedicated to short selling strategies contribute to
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

tail risk, consistent with Billio et al. (2012). Both of these papers use a regime switching
empirical approach, thus the finding of similar results is unsurprising.
Taking a slightly different econometric approach, Aragon and Strahan (2012) examine
liquidity in stocks that are held in large amounts by hedge funds whose prime brokers were
Lehman Brothers and Bear Stearns, respectively. They find greater declines in stocks held in
large quantity at Lehman Brothers and attribute this effect to the bankruptcy announcement that
contributed to uncertainty during the crisis, concluding that a reduction in funding liquidity
negatively affects market liquidity. This result is a direct confirmation of Brunnermeier and
Pedersen (2009).
The links among liquidity, hedge fund returns, and systemic risk are an increasingly
important topic in the finance literature as financial markets have become more and more
interconnected. Additionally, many of the existing studies of and the potential for systemic risk
focus on increasing correlations among asset class returns since the 1990s, including
correlations among hedge fund returns. For example, Buraschi, Kosowski, and Trojani (2014)
examine the cross-sectional hedge fund returns using various hedge fund characteristics. They
find a significant negative market price of correlation risk. The authors also examine individual
hedge fund returns, and once they control for correlation risk, previously observed significant
hedge fund alphas disappear. This finding is important because traditional risk-adjusted alphas
may underestimate hedge fund risk. Finally, their evidence shows a nonlinear relation between
correlation risk and tail risk, indicating that hedge funds with large exposures to extreme
downside risks experience large losses during market crashes, which is consistent with Billio et
al. (2012). Buraschi et al. conclude from this analysis that correlation risk is a systematic risk
factor for hedge fund returns.
Bali, Brown, and Caglayan (2014) approach these issues in a slightly different manner
since they seek to quantify measures of macroeconomic risk, as opposed to most other studies
that measure financial risk, and their effects on the risk exposures of hedge funds and mutual
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

funds. Specifically, they use measures of macroeconomic risk that are related to economic
uncertainty by estimating the conditional volatilities of these variables using a GARCH model.
The authors find that these “uncertainty betas” robustly explain hedge fund returns, but not
mutual fund returns, suggesting that hedge fund managers may have greater abilities to detect
potential future financial market volatility and adjust to changes in financial and macroeconomic
conditions. These results are consistent with the similar supposition of Ben-David et al. (2012).
Bali et al. (2012) find that tail risk explains the cross-sectional dispersion in hedge fund
returns, and that these risks are strongly related to market risk, residual risk, and tail risk. Kang,
Kondor, and Sadka (2014) demonstrate that hedge funds contribute to increased idiosyncratic
risk in single stocks, especially those with high initial levels of idiosyncratic risk. Conversely,
hedge funds decrease idiosyncratic risk in stocks with low initial levels of idiosyncratic risk.
Finally, Di Cesare, Stork, and de Vries (2015) examine the autocorrelation in hedge fund
returns in some previous studies and demonstrate the importance of accounting for serial
correlation when conducting empirical research in this area. According to De Cesare et al. (p.
868), “unadjusted risk measures can considerably underestimate the true extent of individual
and systemic risks for hedge funds.” This evidence confirms the earlier findings of Getmansky,
Lo, and Makarov (2004) and provides an alternative to their approach that smooths returns to
address serial correlation in hedge fund returns. All other studies examining hedge fund returns
that are cited in this chapter include some type of adjustment for serial correlation.
Although not specifically related to hedge funds, another strand of research explores
systemic risk more generally. The methodologies of these papers may prove useful for future
research about hedge funds. For example, Acharya, Engle, and Richardson (2012) use a
measure of capital shortfall to create a measure of systemic risk (SRISK) for U.S. and European
banks and companies. They compare and contrast this measure to two alternatives based on
the Conditional VaR (CoVaR) models of Adrian and Brunnermeier (2011): CoVaR and Exposure
CoVaR. The authors contend that their CoVaR measure is superior because it accounts for both
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

firm size and leverage. Acharya et al. also use the empirical model of Brownlees and Engle
(2011) to explore volatility, tail risk, and correlation in financial markets.
In a series of articles appearing in the Journal of Banking & Finance (JBF), several
authors explore alternative measures of systemic risk that may be used to examine the relation
between hedge funds and systemic risk. Rodriquez-Moreno and Peña (2013) find that credit
default swap spreads outperform measures based on interbank interest rates or equity returns
in estimating systemic risk measures. To achieve this result, they rank measures according to
the Granger causality tests, the Gonzalo and Granger (1995) cointegration metric, and the
correlation of an index of systemic events to policy actions. Puzanova and Düllmann (2013) use
the expected shortfall approach to estimate the expected loss to depositors and investors in
banks using credit portfolios. They propose capital surcharges to systemically risky banks in
similar fashion to Brunnermeier and Cheridito (2014).
Two additional JBF papers address these issues in the CoVaR framework of Adrian and
Brunnermeier (2011). Girardi and Ergün (2013) use this measure to determine that depository
institutions were the primary drivers of systemic risk from 2000 to 2008, ahead of broker-
dealers, insurance companies, and non-depository institutions, which is consistent with Billio et
al. (2012). They also point to the importance of correctly estimating the underlying distribution of
returns as a skewed t-distribution as opposed to the normal distribution that is often used in
practice. Bernal, Gnabo, and Guilmin (2014, p. 270) also rely on the CoVaR framework “to
provide a formal ranking of the financial services sectors with respect to their contribution to
systemic risk.” They extend their approach based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to show that
a loosely defined “other” financial services sector contributes more to systemic risk than both
the banking and insurance sectors. Their analysis, however, does not clearly identify firms
included in this “other” financial services sector even though a substantial portion of these
entities may be hedge funds.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

Finally, Patro, Qi, and Sun (2013) seek to determine how relevant and effective stock
return correlations are as an indicator of systemic risk among financial institutions. They find
that daily stock return correlations and default correlations provide a significant and timely
systemic risk indicator. These correlations provide additional information that is not captured by
default correlations. The authors recommend that regulators monitor stock return correlations
among large and systemically important financial institutions to estimate ongoing levels of
systematic risk.
In the theoretical literature on this topic, Brunnermeier and Cheridito (2014) develop a
theoretical model to measure the total systemic risk (SystRisk) in the financial system based on
shocks to the financial system and the resulting feedback loop. They quantify institutions’
specific contributions to systemic risk, including hedge funds, and propose an intriguing
potential cap and trade system for systemic risk that regulators may apply to firms across the
financial system. The model of Allen, Babus, and Carletti (2010) posits that interconnectedness
among banks contributes to systemic risk, in concert with the empirical findings of Billio, et al.
(2012). Finally, Billio et al. (2016) develop theoretical risk measures that capture the tail risk of
single hedge fund strategies based on regime-switching models. Their model also demonstrates
that liquidity risk and credit risk affect tail risk of hedge funds, especially during a crisis period.
Bengtsson (2016) examines the potential dangers of the “shadow banking” system,
which has come to include hedge funds and similarly opaque entities. He highlights the risk that
hedge funds are providing funding to the banking system, which may be rapidly withdrawn
during a liquidity crisis. Additionally, he notes that hedge funds continue to supply a substantial
proportion of the sellers’ share of the market for credit default swaps. Thus, they are assuming
risks that have been traditionally held by investment banks and insurance companies.
Bengtsson calls for increased regulatory examination of these increasingly interconnected
relationships. The Financial Stability Board (2011, p. 4) examines these risks as well,
recommending a “monitoring framework to assess shadow banking risks.”
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Despite the mixed results of the pre-financial crisis evidence about hedge funds’ systemic risk in
both academic work and government reports, the evidence after the 2007-2008 financial crisis
suggests that hedge funds may play a role in introducing at least some systemic risk into the
financial system. Government officials and regulators have proposed various ways to address
these potentially systemic issues. New regulations are gradually taking effect as regulators take
steps to increase hedge fund transparency and improve methods for collecting data on the
activities of hedge funds. The examination of hedge funds’ potential contribution to market
turbulence has proven difficult. Some academic studies find no evidence of systemic risks that
are related to hedge funds while other find counter-effects. Hedge funds may have the potential
to amplify and/or mitigate systemic risks due to their particular risk management incentives,
leverage, and investment strategies. The implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act and the
establishment of the FSOC ensure that these issues will continue to receive proper attention.
Several theoretical academic studies point to the potential for a possible link between
hedge funds and systemic risk, especially as it relates to liquidity. The extensive results of the
post-crisis empirical studies provide regulators with an abundance of methodologies to evaluate
the extent of these risks and to prescribe potential remedies, especially regarding the
counterparty credit measures of hedge funds and their prime brokers. The increasingly
interconnected global financial system makes continued examination of these issues pertinent.
Another strand of literature examines the potential for “tail risk” induced by hedge funds’ risk
management incentives that may increase risk-taking and leverage while shrinking hedge fund
liquidity. Academic studies examine several additional factors in this process, including hedge
funds’ exposures to macroeconomic risks, their contribution to a “shadow banking” system, and
the potential for hedge funds to induce and perpetuate market contagion. Although the existing
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

academic evidence on these topics is somewhat mixed, these issues merit further examination
by regulators and further research by academics.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Explain the relation between hedge fund characteristics and risk.
2. Discuss how hedge funds and the potential for “shadow banking” may contribute to systemic
risk and the prospect for “contagion.”
3. Identify the most promising areas of research for future researchers in the area of hedge
fund systemic risk.
4. Discuss the impact of hedge fund regulation on hedge funds’ ability to deliver positive alpha
to hedge fund investors.
REFERENCES
Acharya, Viral, Robert Engle, and Matthew Richardson. 2012. "Capital Shortfall: A New
Approach to Ranking and Regulating Systemic Risks." American Economic Review 102:3,
59–64.
Adrian, Tobias, and Markus K. Brunnermeier. 2011. “CoVar.” Working Paper No. 17454,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Adrian, Tobias, Markus K. Brunnermeier, and Hoai-Luu Q Nguyen. 2013. “Hedge Fund Tail
Risk.” In Joseph G. Haubrick and Andrew W. Lo (eds.), Quantifying Systemic Risk, 155–
172. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti. 2010. “Financial Connections and Systemic
Risk.” Working Paper No. 16177, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ang, Andrew, Sergiy Gorovyy, and Gregory B. Van Inwegen. 2011. "Hedge Fund Leverage."
Journal of Financial Economics 102:1, 102-126.
Aragon, George O., and Philip E. Strahan. 2012. "Hedge Funds as Liquidity Providers:
Evidence from the Lehman Bankruptcy." Journal of Financial Economics 103:3, 570–587.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

Avramov, Doron, Robert Kosowski, Narayan Y. Naik, and Melvyn Teo. 2011. "Hedge Funds,
Managerial Skill, and Macroeconomic Variables." Journal of Financial Economics 99:3, 672-
692.
Avramov, Doron, and Russ Wermers. 2006. "Investing in Mutual Funds When Returns Are
Predictable." Journal of Financial Economics 81:2, 339–377.
Bali, Turan G., Stephen J. Brown, and Mustafa O. Caglayan. 2012. "Systematic Risk and the
Cross Section of Hedge Fund Returns." Journal of Financial Economics 106:1, 114–131.
Bali, Turan G., Stephen J. Brown, and Mustafa O. Caglayan. 2014. "Macroeconomic Risk and
Hedge Fund Returns." Journal of Financial Economics 114:1, 1–19.
BarclayHedge. 2016. “Hedge Fund Industry − Assets Under Management.” Available at
http://www.barclayhedge.com/research/indices/ghs/mum/Hedge_Fund.html.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Angela Ng. 2005. "Market Integration and Contagion."
Journal of Business 78:1, 39–69.
Ben-David, Itzhak, Francesco Franzoni, and Rabih Moussawi. 2012. "Hedge Fund Stock
Trading in the Financial Crisis of 2007–2009." Review of Financial Studies 25:1, 1–54.
Bengtsson, Elias. 2016. "Investment Funds, Shadow Banking and Systemic Risk." Journal of
Financial Regulation and Compliance 24:1, 60–73.
Bernal, Oscar, Jean-Yves Gnabo, and Grégory Guilmin. 2014. "Assessing the Contribution of
Banks, Insurance and Other Financial Services to Systemic Risk." Journal of Banking &
Finance 47: October, 270–287.
Bernanke, Ben S. 2006. “Hedge Funds and Systemic Risk.” Remarks delivered at the Federal
Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 2006 Financial Markets Conference - Hedge Funds: Creators of
Risk.
Billio, Monica, Lorenzo Frattarolo, and Loriana Pelizzon. 2016. "Hedge Fund Tail Risk: An
Investigation in Stressed Markets, Extended Version with Appendix." Working Paper,
Department of Economics, Ca' Foscari University of Venice.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

Billio, Monica, Mila Getmansky, Andrew W. Lo, and Loriana Pelizzon. 2012. "Econometric
Measures of Connectedness and Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors."
Journal of Financial Economics 104:3, 535–559.
Billio, Monica, Mila Getmansky, and Loriana Pelizzon. 2010. "Crises and Hedge Fund Risk."
Working Paper, Department of Economics, Ca' Foscari University of Venice.
Boyson, Nicole M., Christof W. Stahel, and René M. Stulz. 2010. "Hedge Fund Contagion and
Liquidity Shocks." Journal of Finance 65:5, 1789–1816.
Brandon, Rajna Gibson, and Songtao Wang. 2013. "Liquidity Risk, Return Predictability, and
Hedge Funds’ Performance: An Empirical Study." Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 48:1, 219–244.
Brown, Stephen J., Inchang Hwang, Francis In, and Tong Suk Kim. 2013. "Systemic Risk and
Cross-Sectional Hedge Fund Returns." Working Paper, New York University.
Brownlees, Christian T., and Robert Engle. 2011. "Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic
Risk Measurement." Working Paper, New York University,
Brunnermeier, Markus K. 2009. "Financial Crisis: Mechanism, Prevention and Management." In
Mathias Dewatripont, Xaiver Freixas, and Richard Portes (eds.), Macroeconomic Stability
and Financial Regulation: Key Issues for the G20, 91–104. London: Centre for Economic
Policy Research.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Patrick Cheridito. 2014. "Measuring and Allocating Systemic
Risk." Working Paper, Princeton University.
Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H. Pedersen. 2009. "Market Liquidity and Funding
Liquidity." Review of Financial Studies 22:6, 2201–2238.
Brunnermeier, Markus K, and Martin Oehmke. 2012. “Bubbles, Financial Crises, and Systemic
Risk.” Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

Buraschi, Andrea, Robert Kosowski, and Fabio Trojani. 2014. "When There Is No Place to Hide:
Correlation Risk and the Cross-Section of Hedge Fund Returns." Review of Financial
Studies 27:2, 581–616.
Di Cesare, Antonio, Philip A. Stork, and Casper G. de Vries. 2015. "Risk Measures for
Autocorrelated Hedge Fund Returns." Journal of Financial Econometrics 13:4, 868–895.
Dixon, Lloyd, Noreen Clancy, and Krishna B. Kumar. 2012. Hedge Funds and Systemic Risk.
Arlington, VA RAND Corporation.
Dodd-Frank Act. 2010. Pub. L. No. 111-203, § 401, 124 Stat. 1376, 1570 (2010).
Financial Services Authority. 2010. Assessing Possible Source of Systemic Risk from Hedge
Funds. Available at http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/hedge_funds.pdf.
Financial Stability Board. 2011. Shadow Banking: Strengthening Oversight and Regulation:
Recommendations of the Financial Stability Board. Available at http://www.fsb.org/wp-
content/uploads/r_111027a.pdf?page_moved=1.
Fung, William, and David A. Hsieh. 1997. "Empirical Characteristics of Dynamic Trading
Strategies: The Case of Hedge Funds." Review of Financial Studies 10:2, 275–302.
Getmansky, Mila, Andrew W. Lo, and Igor Makarov. 2004. "An Econometric Model of Serial
Correlation and Illiquidity in Hedge Fund Returns." Journal of Financial Economics 74:3,
529–609.
Girardi, Giulio, and A. Tolga Ergün. 2013. "Systemic Risk Measurement: Multivariate GARCH
Estimation of CoVaR." Journal of Banking & Finance 37:8, 3169–3180.
Gonzalo, Jesus, and Clive Granger. 1995. "Estimation of Common Long-Memory Components
in Cointegrated Systems." Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13:1, 27–35.
International Organization of Securities Commissions. 2013. Report on the Second IOSCO
Hedge Fund Survey. Available at https://goo.gl/JcZkNE.
Kambhu, John, Til Schuermann, and Kevin J Stiroh. 2007. "Hedge Funds, Financial
Intermediation, and Systemic Risk." FRBNY Economic Policy Review 13:3, 1–18.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

Kang, Namho, Péter Kondor, and Ronnie Sadka. 2014. "Do Hedge Funds Reduce Idiosyncratic
Risk?" Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 49:04, 843–877.
Office of Financial Research. 2013. Asset Management and Financial Stability. Available at
https://goo.gl/Tlhby5.Patro, Dilip K., Min Qi, and Xian Sun. 2013. "A Simple Indicator of
Systemic Risk." Journal of Financial Stability 9:1, 105–116.
Pedersen, Lasse H. 2009. “When Everyone Runs for the Exits.” International Journal of Central
Banking 5:4, 177-189.
Puzanova, Natalia, and Klaus Düllmann. 2013. "Systemic Risk Contributions: A Credit Portfolio
Approach." Journal of Banking & Finance 37:4, 1243–1257.
Ramaswamy, Srichander. 2011. “Market Structures and Systemic Risks of Exchange-Traded
Funds.” BIS Working Paper No. 343, Bank for International Settlements.
Rodríguez-Moreno, María, and Juan Ignacio Peña. 2013. "Systemic Risk Measures: The
Simpler the Better?" Journal of Banking & Finance 37:6, 1817–1831.
Sadka, Ronnie. 2010. "Liquidity Risk and the Cross-Section of Hedge-Fund Returns." Journal of
Financial Economics 98:1, 54–71.
Securities and Exchange Commission. 2003. Implications of the Growth of Hedge Funds. Staff
Report to the United States Securities and Exchange Commission. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1997. "The Limits of Arbitrage." Journal of Finance 52:1,
35–55.
Stulz, René M. 2007. "Hedge Funds: Past, Present, and Future." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 21:2, 175–194.
Teo, Melvyn. 2011. "The Liquidity Risk of Liquid Hedge Funds." Journal of Financial Economics
100:1, 24–44.
U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. 2006. The Role of Hedge
Funds in Our Capital Markets. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Wulf Kaal is an Associate Professor of Law at the University of St. Thomas School of Law. His
theoretical and empirical research focuses on financial and regulatory policy. Before entering
academia, he worked at Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP and Goldman Sachs. He has published
about 50 articles appearing in the Journal of Alternative Investments, Business Lawyer,
Minnesota Law Review, Washington & Lee Law Review, and Wake Forest Law Review, among
many others. His study on the effects of hedge fund registration under the Dodd-Frank Act
gained national attention and is cited in various media outlets. He is the author and/or editor of
several books and book chapters. Professor Kaal has also been a consultant to major
corporations and hedge funds. He received a PhD in law and economics from Humboldt
Universitaet zu in Berlin - Berlin, Germany, and L.L.M. and J.D. degrees from the University of
Illinois College of Law, and an M.B.A. from Durham University in the United Kingdom.
Timothy A. Krause is an Assistant Professor and the Director of the Intrieri Family Student
Managed Fund at the Black School of Business at Penn State Behrend. He spent 20 years in
the financial services industry as an investments professional at Zecco Trading, Vector Capital
Markets, BNP Paribas, and Bank of America. He has taught undergraduate and MBA finance
courses at UT - San Antonio, Pepperdine University, and St. Edward’s University. His research
and teaching interests include investments, derivatives, risk management, financial institutions
and markets. His research appears in leading finance journals such as the Journal of
Derivatives, Applied Financial Economics, International Journal of Accounting and Information
Management, and Review of Quantitative Finance and Accounting. He received both a B.A. in
government/economics and an MBA in finance from Georgetown University and a PhD in
finance from the University of Texas at San Antonio
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2748096

