S L
CHOOL OF AW
Legal Studies Research Paper Series
T R C I
HE OLE OF ORPORATE NTEGRITY
A E
GREEMENTS IN THE XPANSION OF
F D
IDUCIARY UTIES
Working Paper, 2013
Wulf A. Kaal
Associate Professor of Law
Elizabeth R. Malay
Associate, Winthrop & Weinstine
Minneapolis, MN
University of St. Thomas School of Law
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 13-25
This paper can be downloaded without charge from
The Social Science Research Network electronic library at:
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2317580
A complete list of University of St. Thomas School of Law
Research Papers can be found at:
http://www.ssrn.com/link/st-thomas-legal-studies.html

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
THE ROLE OF CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS IN THE EXPANSION OF FIDUCIARY
DUTIES
BY
WULF A. KAAL *
&
ELIZABETH R. MALAY *
* Associate Professor, University of Saint Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis). The author wishes to
thank research librarians Valerie Aggerbeck and Megan McNevin for their outstanding support.
* J.D. 2013, University of St. Thomas School of Law; Associate at Winthrop & Weinstine, P.A.,
Minneapolis.
1

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
ABSTRACT
Academics have long debated the purpose and scope of fiduciary duties. The
academic debate has mostly ignored the role of Corporate Integrity Agreements (CIAs).
CIAs can blur the line between the law and aspirational governance. As a contractual
arrangement, the terms of CIAs between health care companies and the government
require heightened compliance duties. Unlike regular contractual arrangements, however,
the enforcement of CIAs goes beyond contractual remedies. The breach of a CIA can be
treated like a breach of law for purposes of the duty of care.
Courts are increasingly recognizing the role of CIAs and their implications for
directors’ fiduciary duties. A prominent recent decision, In re Pfizer, illustrates the role of
CIAs in the evolution of fiduciary duties. Although the court in Pfizer did not conclude
that the CIAs actually created fiduciary duties, the court opined that the CIAs “imposed
affirmative obligations on Pfizer's board that went well beyond the basic fiduciary duties
required by Delaware law.” A broader reading of this phraseology suggests that fiduciary
duties could perhaps be augmented by contractual arrangements such as CIAs. It seems
possible that future courts, in following this reasoning, may interpret CIAs as expanding
the basic legal duty of care.
2

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................... 4
II. EXPANDING FIDUCIARY DUTIES ............................................................................................................. 6
III. CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS ............................................................................................... 8
1. Background ...................................................................................................................................................... 8
2. Characteristics .............................................................................................................................................. 10
3. Reach and Scope .......................................................................................................................................... 11
IV. THE ROLE OF CIAS IN EXPANDING FIDUCIARY DUTIES ............................................................. 13
1. Contractual Addendum to Increase Duties ....................................................................................... 13
2. Delineating the Role of CIAs in Fiduciary Duties ......................................................................... 14
3. Limitations ...................................................................................................................................................... 18
V. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................................... 19
3

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
I. Introduction
Traditional fiduciary duty doctrine is among the most amorphous concepts in the
law and leads to confusion, inconsistency, and to cases with somewhat problematic
outcomes.1 The standard for liability is so high that it is hard for courts to find directors
in violation of their fiduciary duties.2 Only a board’s sustained or systematic failure to
exercise oversight can result in liability.3 Academics have debated ways to improve the
fiduciary duty doctrine for decades.4 There is some agreement that fiduciary duties are
too vague and should be better defined.5 Despite various nuances on side issues,6 the
1 Lisa Firfax, Disney, Good Faith, and Structural Bias, 32 J. CORP. LAW 833, 850 (2007) (discussing the
various Disney cases).
2 Id. at 846.
3 Lyman Johnson & Mark A. Sides, Sarbanes-Oxley Act and Fiduciary Duties, 30 WM. MITCHELL L. REV.
101, 142 (2004) [hereinafter Johnson & Sides]; see alsoIn re Caremark Int’l Inc. Derivative Litig., 698
A.2d 959, 971 (Del. Ch. 1996).
4 See, e.g., Claire A. Hill & Brett H. McDonnell, Fiduciary Duties and Emerging Jurisprudence, in
RESEARCH HANDBOOK ON THE ECONOMICS OF CORPORATE LAW 133 (Claire A. Hill & Brett
H. McDonnell, eds., 2012) [hereinafter Hill & McDonnell]; Lyman P.Q. Johnson & Mark A. Sides, The
Sarbanes-Oxley Act and Fiduciary Duties, 30 WM. MITCHELL L. REV. 1149, 1192-95 (2004) (In “corporate
law, the duties are broad and usefully ill-defined—decision-makers must act with “loyalty” and “care” and
in “good faith,” but are accorded wide latitude in discharging their governance responsibilities in
conformance with these standards.”); Cheryl L. Wade, Fiduciary Duty and the Public Interest, 91 B.U. L.
REV. 1191 (2011) [hereinafter Wade] (citing Tamar Frankel, FIDUCIARY LAW 166 (2011) [hereinafter
Frankel] (“[W]hen the public interest conflicts with shareholder primacy and wealth-maximization goals,
courts may enforce duties that fiduciaries owe shareholders rather than enforce fiduciaries' compliance with
law and regulation that protect the public interest.”)).Thomas J. Moloney, Paul R. St. Lawrence, III &
Angela F. Hamarich, Fiduciary Duties, Broker-Dealers and Sophisticated Clients: A Mis-Match That
Could Only Be Made in Washington, 3 J. SEC. L. REG. & COMPLIANCE 336 (2010) [hereinafter Fiduciary
Duties, Broker-Dealers and Sophisticated Clients] (providing an overview of the fiduciary duty debate);
Lisa M. Fairfax, Spare the Rod, Spoil the Director – Revitalizing Directors’ Fiduciary Duty through Legal
Liability, 42 HOUS. L. REV. 393 (2005-2006) [hereinafter Fairfax] (asserting that “legal liability represents
an essential mechanism for ensuring directors' fidelity to their fiduciary duties and for questioning reform
efforts that do not include such liability.”); Margaret M. Blair, Stakeholders as Shareholders, Ownership
and Control: Rethinking Corporate Governance for the Twenty-First Century, 109 HARV. L. REV. 1150
(1996) [hereinafter Blair].
5 See, e.g., Claire A. Hill & Brett McDonnell, Executive Compensation and the Optimal Penumbra of
Delaware Corporate Law, VA. L. & BUS. REV. 334, 334, 336 (2009) [hereinafter Optimal Penumbra];
Johnson & Sides, supra note 3, at 101, 139; Larry E. Ribstein, Fencing Fiduciary Duties, 91 B.U. L. Rev.
859, 899 (2011) [hereinafter Ribstein].
6 One group of scholars emphasizes the differences between the duties of corporate officers and directors,
see e.g. Paul E. McGreal, Corporate Compliance Survey, 64 Bus. Law. 253, 273 (2008) [hereinafter
Compliance Survey]. (“Some commentators, taking their cue from agency law, have suggested that an
officer’s fiduciary duties should be more demanding [than a director’s].”) (citing Lyman P.Q. Johnson &
Robert V. Vicca, (Not) Advising Corporate Officers About Fiduciary Duties, 42 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 663
(2007)); Lyman P.Q. Johnson & David Millon, Recalling Why Corporate Officers Are Fiduciaries, 46 WM.
& MARY L. REV. 1597, 1600 & n.10 (2005) (“[C]ourts and commentators routinely describe the duties of
directors and officers together, and in identical terms.”). For cases that discuss officers’ fiduciary duties,
see generally Hill & McDonnell, supra note 4, at 133. Another group of scholars evaluates the practical
limitations of fiduciary duties, see e.g. Lisa M. Fairfax, Managing Expectations – Does the Directors’ Duty
to Monitor Promise More than it Can Deliver?, [___] U. ST. THOMAS L.J. [___] (forthcoming 2013) (on
file with author); Wulf A. Kaal, A Comparative Perspective on The Limitations of The Duty of Oversight –
A Comment on Lisa Fairfax, [__] St. Thomas L. J. [__] (forthcoming 2013).
4

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
main debate focuses on whether improvements to the fiduciary duty doctrine can be
attained through expansion7 or curtailment8 of the doctrine.
The academic debate on options for improvement of the fiduciary duty doctrine
has ignored the possible role of Corporate Integrity Agreements (CIAs). CIAs are
administratively-enforced compliance programs funded by health care companies but
enforced by the government. In other words, they are contracts between health care
companies and the federal government and can involve costly mandatory compliance
measures and penalties.9 Because the directors contractually agree to increase compliance
by way of an open door policy for the government,10 CIAs can substantially increase the
risk of liability for companies whose directors did not act in accordance with their
fiduciary responsibilities. While CIAs are outside the traditional legal framework that
formally defines fiduciary duties, they fit into the penumbra of extra-legal forces11 that
helps to clarify the expectations for directors.
The contractual obligations in CIAs can enhance directors’ fiduciary default
duties, expanding the duty of care for directors of health care corporations beyond the
legal standard under Caremark and Ritter.12 The duties imposed in a CIA can include,
among others: the passing of specific resolutions, appointment of a chief compliance
officer (CCO); agreement that the CCO will increase the frequency of reports to the
board; board certification of compliance with the CIA; reporting of compliance issues to
the relevant authorities; and annual reviews through an independent review
organization.13
Courts are increasingly recognizing the role of CIAs and their implications for
directors’ fiduciary duties. A prominent recent decision, In re Pfizer,14 illustrates the role
7 See Claire A. Hill & Brett H. McDonnell, Stone v. Ritter and the Expanding Duty of Loyalty, 76
FORDHAM L. REV. 1769 (2007); see, e.g., Frankel, supra note 4 (clarifying the theory behind an expansive
version of fiduciary duties); Cynthia A. Williams & John M. Conley, Is There an Emerging Fiduciary Duty
to Consider Human Rights?, 74 U. CINCINNATI L. REV. 75, 77 (2005).
8 Ribstein, supra note 5, at 899 (arguing for a more precise definition and more limited application of
fiduciary duties).
9 GREG LUCE, HEALTH CARE LITIGATION STRATEGIES: LEADING LAWYERS ON ANALYZING RECENT
HEALTH CARE LITIGATION TRENDS, DEVELOPING SUCCESSFUL CASE STRATEGIES, AND PROTECTING
CLIENT RIGHTS, DEFENDING THE HEALTH CARE INDUSTRY AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT’S EXPANDING AND
NOVEL THEORIES OF LIABILITY (2011) [hereinafter HEALTH CARE LITIGATION STRATEGIES].
10 A board that executes a CIA agrees to increased government scrutiny, including but not limited to
granting permission for government site visits during the term of the CIA. U.S. Dept. Health and Human
Servs. Office of Inspector Gen., Corporate Integrity Agreement FAQ, https://oig.hhs.gov/faqs/corporate-
integrity-agreements-faq.asp (last visited Aug. 1, 2013) [hereinafter Corporate Integrity Agreement FAQ]
(“[The purpose of a site visit is] to verify the entity's compliance with the terms of its Corporate Integrity
Agreement and to provide OIG with an opportunity to observe an entity's compliance program in practice.
The first-hand observations obtained while on site provide the OIG with a more accurate and
comprehensive assessment of an entity's compliance program. The site visit also offers the entity the
unique, one-on-one opportunity to educate us regarding the entity's operations. OIG has also found that site
visits help foster more effective communication between the entity and the OIG.”).
11 See Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5, at 334.
12 Stone v. Ritter, 911 A.2d 362,364 (Del. 2006) (quoting In re Caremark Int’l Inc. Derivative Litig., 698
A.2d 959, 971 (Del. Ch. 1996)).
13 Corporate Integrity Agreements, U.S. DEPT. HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVS. OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GEN.,
https://oig.hhs.gov/compliance/corporate-integrity-agreements/index.asp (last visited Aug. 5, 2013)
[hereinafter Corporate Integrity Agreements].
14 In re Pfizer, 722 F. Supp. 2d 453, 461 (S.D.N.Y. 2010)
5

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
of CIAs in the evolution of fiduciary duties. Although the court in Pfizer did not conclude
that the CIAs actually created fiduciary duties, the court opined that the CIAs “imposed
affirmative obligations on Pfizer's board that went well beyond the basic fiduciary duties
required by Delaware law.”15 A broad reading of this phraseology suggests that fiduciary
duties could perhaps be augmented by contractual arrangements such as CIAs. Should
other courts follow this reasoning, fiduciary duties—and more specifically directors’
basic legal duty of care—could over time expand in the CIA context.
This article includes five parts. Part II introduces the academic debate on the
scope and expansion of fiduciary duties. Part III explores the main characteristics of
CIAs, their reach and scope, and common denominators in executed CIAs. Part IV
outlines the role of CIAs in expanding the law of fiduciary duties both as a contractual
addendum and as a hybrid form of aspirational corporate governance. The authors
delineate the role of CIAs in fiduciary duties by discussing relevant case law. After
exploring the benefits of CIAs for the expansion of fiduciary duties, the authors outline
possible limitations. Part V concludes.
II. Expanding Fiduciary Duties
The law of fiduciary duties has evolved as a result of both judicial decisions
(traditional legal holdings as well as non-adjudicatory writings) and traditional equity and
standards-based approaches to governance duties.16 Traditionally only two fiduciary
duties existed, the duties of loyalty and care.17 But, fiduciary duty law has evolved in the
past few decades and fiduciary duties have expanded.18 Today, courts recognize
intermediate standards, particularly the duty of good faith, making directors responsible
for a triad of fiduciary duties.19 In addition to judicial decisions, the recent financial crises
and their legislative fallout have played a role in changing the law of fiduciary duties.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act20 and the Dodd-Frank Act have influenced and shaped fiduciary
duties but have not necessarily improved and clarified them.21
15 Id.
16 Johnson & Sides, supra note 3, at 104.
17 Id.
18 Claire A. Hill & Brett McDonnell, Introduction: The Evolution of the Economic Analysis of Corporate
Law, in RESEARCH HANDBOOKS IN LAW AND ECONOMICS 5 (Claire A. Hill & Brett H. McDonnell, eds.,
2012); see also Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5, at 347, 353 (claiming that despite the evolution of
fiduciary duties, the changes as of yet are incomplete and of disputable value and arguing that because
market forces alone cannot create an optimal director mindset, and courts alone cannot micro-manage
businesses, fiduciary duty law can and should be supplemented by extra legal forces).
19 Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5, at 338; see also Claire A. Hill & Brett McDonnell, Disney, Good
Faith, and Structural Bias, 32 J. CORP. L. 833, 834, 845 (2007) [hereinafter Disney, Good Faith, and
Structural Bias] (citing In re Walt Disney Co. Derivative Litig., 906 A.2d 27, 66-67 (Del. 2006)).
20 Disney, Good Faith, and Structural Bias, supra note 19, at 848.
21 Johnson & Sides, supra note 3. Johnson and Sides point out that, rather than assessing whether directors
followed specific rules, judges review the manner in which directors acted. This “process” approach allows
a “tailored” response to breach of fiduciary duty claims, resulting in incremental changes to fiduciary duty
norms over time. Id. at 140. Because of this “process” approach, Johnson and Sides argue that laws such as
Sarbanes-Oxley are incapable of providing a comprehensive, clearly-defined approach to proper
governance – fiduciary duties are much more nuanced and norm-driven than the duties required by such
statutes. Id. Johnson and Sides agree that federal statutes can breathe new meaning into our understanding
of proper oversight or reasonable care. Id. at 143. For example, the duty of due care requires directors to
monitor the corporation and act with appropriate oversight. Id. at 141. One often overlooked issue is
6

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
The academic debate on the scope and reach of fiduciary duties has endured for
more than three decades. There is some consensus that fiduciary duties are too vague and
should be better defined.22 A minority of scholars prefers a limited application of
fiduciary duties,23 citing as a particular concern the expansion of fiduciary duties via
federal law.24 To avoid confusion and inconsistency in the law of fiduciary duties, these
scholars conceptualize fiduciary duties as a type of contract25 and a duty of
unselfishness.26 This narrower definition of fiduciary duties is rooted in the concept of
entrustment: when the control of an organization is separated from the ownership of that
organization, the fiduciary duty owed by the controllers protects the owners.27 In these
relationships, it would be costly or impracticable for the owner to fully monitor the
controller.28 Hence, fiduciary duties exist to compensate for owners’ inability to fully
monitor the controllers.29
Chancellor Allen’s admonition in Caremark that directors have an “obligation to be reasonably informed,”
that they must “exercise reasonable oversight,” and that directors must “assure a reasonable information
and reporting system” exists. Id. at 142-43 (citing Caremark at 970-71). What this means is that directors
have an obligation to be “reasonably informed” and what that obligation means will shift as the legislature
passes federal laws setting new norms. Id. at 143. Further, part of due care requires directors to ensure their
corporation’s compliance with various regulatory schemes. Id. This duty will also shift as more laws are
passed. Id. Johnson and Sides, while arguing that fiduciary duties are not federalized, acknowledge the
impact that federal laws have on governance responsibilities, even though the responsibilities are still broad
and open to interpretation.
22 See, e.g., Ribstein, supra note 5, at 899; Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5, at 336; Johnson & Sides,
supra note 3, at 139.
23 Ribstein, supra note 5, at 899 (arguing for a more precise definition and more limited application of
fiduciary duties).
24 See Roberta Romano, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Making of Quack Corporate Governance, 114
YALE L. J. 1523, 1529 (2005) [hereinafter Quack Corporate Governance]; Stephen M. Bainbridge, Dodd-
Frank: Quack Corporate Governance Round II, 95 MINN. L. REV. 1779 (2011) [hereinafter Dodd-Frank];
Roberta Romano, Answering the Wrong Question: The Tenuous Case for Mandatory Corporate Laws, 89
COLUM. L. REV. 1599, 1601 (1989) [hereinafter Answering the Wrong Question] (arguing that corporate
governance laws should not be mandatory even before SOX was passed).
25 Ribstein, supra note 5, at 859.
26 Ribstein, supra note 5, at 858 (arguing that a broader view of fiduciary duties has significant limitations
and that the strictness of the duty of unselfishness requires a limited scope). Justice Cardozo, in Meinhard
v. Salmon famously described fiduciary duties (164 N.E. 545 (N.Y. 1928)):
Joint adventurers, like copartners, owe to one another, while the enterprise continues, the
duty of the finest loyalty. . . . A trustee is held to something stricter than the morals of
the market place. Not honesty alone, but the punctilio of an honor the most sensitive, is
then the standard of behavior. Id. at 546.
Ribstein found such a strict duty to be “only rarely appropriate in a competitive marketplace” so therefore
only required in relationships where power was entrusted to a non-owner. Ribstein at 861. Instead of a
broad, vague approach to fiduciary duties, Ribstein believed parties should be able to contractually adjust
the duties promised and be held to a simple duty of unselfishness in relationships where there is an
entrustment of power. Id. at 865.
27 Ribstein, supra note 5, at 859.
28 Larry E. Ribstein, The Structure of the Fiduciary Relationship 8 (U. Illinois Law & Econ. Research
Paper No. LE03-003, 2003), available at http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=397641.
29 Id. at 10.
7

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
A substantial part of the literature supports the expansion of fiduciary duties.30
The leading argument for the expansion of fiduciary duties is that the traditional fiduciary
duty doctrine is inconsistent and can result in cases with problematic outcomes.31 An
increasing number of scholars argue that extra-legal forces can further shape and expand
corporate law.32 The law alone may not always require corporate directors to fulfil their
fiduciary duty to shareholders, but extra-legal forces can help fill the gaps.33 Because
state fiduciary duty law is permissive rather than regulatory, fiduciary standards can
develop from non-legislative sources.34 The overall umbrella of fiduciary responsibilities
is arguably non-binding, more akin to corporate ‘best practices,’ and aspirational in
nature, making extra-legal forces a legitimate source that can help shape fiduciary
duties.35 Extra-legal sources include, among others, the advice given by a corporation’s
law firm, judicial pronouncements made outside the traditional legal opinion, and
influential academic views in today’s corporate governance scholarship.36 These extra-
legal forces can create norms that help guide directors.37
III. Corporate Integrity Agreements
Corporate integrity agreements can have an impact on fiduciary duties and
corporate governance. CIAs are administratively-enforced compliance programs funded
by health care companies but enforced by the government. CIAs can enhance directors’
fiduciary duties if directors contractually agree to increase compliance for the companies
they manage. Through this mechanism, CIAs increase the stakes for companies whose
directors did not act in accordance with their fiduciary responsibilities, as enhanced by
CIAs. CIAs can result in costly mandatory compliance measures and penalties.38
The enhanced duties that can be imposed on boards include: appointment of a
chief compliance officer (CCO); agreement that the CCO will increase the frequency of
reports to the board; board certification of compliance with the CIA; reporting of
compliance issues to the relevant authorities; and annual reviews through an independent
review organization. CIAs are not part of the legal framework that defines fiduciary
duties. However, CIAs are part of the penumbra of extra-legal forces39 that can expand
and help clarify the scope of fiduciary duties.
1. Background
CIAs are a relatively new phenomenon. Beginning in the 1990s, the Department
of Health and Human Services Office of the Inspector General (OIG) started using CIAs
30 See, e.g., Hill & McDonnell, supra note 4; Johnson & Sides, supra note 3; see also Wade, supra note 4;
Fiduciary Duties, Broker-Dealers and Sophisticated Clients, supra note 4; Fairfax, supra note 4; Blair,
supra note 4; Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5.
31 Disney, Good Faith, and Structural Bias, supra note 19, at 850 (discussing the various Disney cases).
32 Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5, at 334, 336; Johnson & Sides, supra note 3, at 104.
33 Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5, at 352.
34 Johnson & Sides, supra note 3, at 137-38.
35 Id. at 138.
36 Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5, at 357-58.
37 Id. at 364.
38 HEALTH CARE LITIGATION STRATEGIES, supra note 9.
39 See Optimal Penumbra, supra note 5 , at 334.
8

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
to resolve False Claims Acts investigations.40 CIAs have evolved from an informal set of
self-disclosure programs into a formalized process,41 requiring the OIG to negotiate CIAs
with health care providers and other entities as part of settlements in the context of health
care program investigations under false claims statutes.42 In exchange for providers’
agreement to be bound by the CIA’s substantive provisions, the OIG does not exclude the
providers from participation in federal health care programs, including Medicare and
Medicaid.43 In effect, the OIG uses providers’ participation in federal health care
programs, and the revenues generated through participation, as leverage to negotiate
substantive provisions in CIAs that increase compliance with expected conduct and
overall welfare.
The provisions in CIAs are diverse and depend on the specific terms of the
settlement. CIAs are generally adjusted to the fact-specific requirements of the individual
company and take preexisting compliance programs into account.44 During the term of a
CIA the company that executed the CIA with the government is required to increase
compliance functions, including upgrades to the internal compliance structure, increased
third-party oversight, and enhanced reporting requirements.45 In effect, a company that
executes a CIA agrees to increased government scrutiny including OIG site visits during
the term of the CIA.46
Noncompliance with a CIA carries serious penalties. Upon noncompliance with
the terms of a CIA, the OIG can prosecute the company or seek its exclusion from federal
health care programs.47 The penalties under CIAs affect the respective entity and
individuals who work for the entity. For instance, companies subject to supervision by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) may not employ individuals who were
40 Cristie Ford & David Hess, Can Corporate Monitorships Improve Corporate Compliance?, 34 J. CORP.
L. 679, 686 (2009) [hereinafter Corporate Monitorships].
41 Id. at 685 (discussing, specifically, the Defense Industry Initiative).
42 Corporate Integrity Agreements, supra note 13; see also Compliance Survey, supra note 6, at 265.
43 Compliance Survey, supra note 6, at 265.
44 See Corporate Integrity Agreements, supra note 13 (“A comprehensive CIA typically lasts 5 years and
includes requirements to: hire a compliance officer/appoint a compliance committee; develop written
standards and policies; implement a comprehensive employee training program; retain an independent
review organization to conduct annual reviews; establish a confidential disclosure program; restrict
employment of ineligible persons; report overpayments, reportable events, and ongoing investigations/legal
proceedings; and provide an implementation report and annual reports to OIG on the status of the entity’s
compliance activities.”).
45 James N. Czaban, Meeting the Challenge of Increased Enforcement for Food and Drug Industry Clients,
in RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN FOOD AND DRUG LAW (2012) [hereinafter Czaban]
46 Corporate Integrity Agreement FAQ, supra note 10 ("[The purpose of a site visit is] to verify the entity's
compliance with the terms of its Corporate Integrity Agreement and to provide OIG with an opportunity to
observe an entity's compliance program in practice. The first-hand observations obtained while on site
provide the OIG with a more accurate and comprehensive assessment of an entity's compliance program.
The site visit also offers the entity the unique, one-on-one opportunity to educate us regarding the entity's
operations. OIG has also found that site visits help foster more effective communication between the entity
and the OIG.”).
47 Jeffrey Fitzgerald, Employer Beware: Hidden Risks of Medicare-Excluded Workers, DENVER BUS. J.,
Dec. 11, 2005, available at http://www.bizjournals.com/denver/stories/2005/12/12/focus2.html?page=all
[hereinafter Employer Beware] (“In legal circles, Medicare exclusion is referred to as the ‘death penalty’
because without Medicare reimbursement, a business can be essentially forced out of the health care
industry.”).
9

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
dismissed for CIA violations. The careers of directors and officers in the pharmaceutical
industry who were prosecuted in the context of CIA violations can be severely affected.48
CIAs can also facilitate the pursuit of increased sanctions against noncompliant
companies. Certification requirements in CIAs, which require directors and officers to
certify compliance with the CIA’s provisions, can lower procedural and enforcement
hurdles.49 The number of individuals who are required to provide certifications under
CIAs has dramatically increased in the past few years and the certification requirements
go well beyond the certification requirements for the CCO.50 With the increased number
of individuals certifying compliance with CIA provisions, the potential for false
certifications and corresponding liability intensifies.51
2. Characteristics
Corporate Integrity Agreements have several core characteristics that distinguish
them from other contractual arrangements between companies and the government. CIAs
often become the standard for expected conduct in a civil or criminal trial.52 CIA
certification requirements can be a powerful tool for prosecutors if the government finds
that the certifications misstate the corporation’s true compliance.53 Once a CIA has been
executed, it is much easier for the government to reopen a case than to pursue a new
one.54 The OIG’s increased scrutiny, the potential for crippling penalties, and the ease of
further prosecution can have a substantial impact on the knowledge, monitoring, and
management of boards of companies that operate under a CIA.
A CIA increases the stakes for directors choosing to eschew their governance
responsibilities. A company operating under a CIA is essentially on parole.55 CIAs give
the government direct access to a health care corporation, facilitating the detection of
compliance issues.56 A corporation that executed a CIA often gives the OIG permission
to inspect the company’s compliance documents and conduct on-site inspections to assess
its compliance with the CIA.57 Should the government find problems upon inspection, it
48 Czaban, supra note 45, at 3.
49 Kathleen McDermott & Arianne Callender, Compliance Certifications and the Era of Accountability – A
Forecast to Debate, 5 J. HEALTH & LIFE SCI. L. 158, 160-61 (2012) [hereinafter Compliance
Certifications].
50 Id. at 172.
51 Compliance Certifications, supra note 49, at 162. (“There is potential for criminal liability under 18
U.S.C. § 1001, making a material false statement to the United States, if the false certifications are made
knowingly. There is also potential for False Claims Act liability for false certifications.”); see also Thomas
Beimers, Caught by the CIA: Corporate Integrity Agreement Violation is Grounds for False Claims Act
Liability, BEYOND HEALTCARE REFORM (Mar. 7, 2012), available at
http://beyondhealthcarereform.com/caught-by-the-cia-corporate-integrity-agreement-violation-is-grounds-
for-false-claims-act-liability/ (The 11th Circuit found that false certifications made as part of CIA
obligations could form the basis for False Claims Act liability) (discussing US ex rel. Matheny v. Medco
Health Solutions, 671 F.3d 1217, 1224 (11th Cir. 2012)).
52 Gabriel L. Imperato & Marc S. Raspanti, Compliance and Governance for Health Care Organization
and Marketing and Sales Activities, 11 J. HEALTH CARE COMPLIANCE 5, 7 (2009).
53 Compliance Certifications, supra note 49, at 162.
54 Czaban, supra note 45, at 3.
55 Id. at 3.
56 See Corporate Integrity Agreement FAQ, supra note 10
57 See, e.g., Corp. Integrity Agreement Between the Off. of the Inspector Gen. of the U.S. Dep’t of Health &
Human Servs. and Allergan, Inc., 50-51 (Aug. 30, 2010), available at
10

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
can increase the penalties beyond the CIAs’ substantive provisions.58 These penalties
include criminal prosecution, fines, additional CIAs, and exclusion from federally funded
health care programs.59 The $2.3 billion Pfizer settlement in 2009 illustrates how
significant possible ramifications can be for companies that engage in illegal activities
after executing a CIA.60
3. Reach and Scope
By imposing stringent and detailed compliance requirements, CIAs can take an
active role in the day-to-day compliance functions of corporations. CIAs affect the day-
to-day compliance operations by increasing the role of the Chief Compliance Officer
(CCO). Should a regulated entity not have a CCO, a CIA typically mandates the
appointment of a CCO.61 The CCO is responsible for implementing the CIA and must
generally report directly to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO), not to the General
Counsel or Chief Financial Officer (CFO).62 CCOs under CIAs usually have direct
access to the boards of directors.63 CIAs typically require companies to create or
maintain a compliance committee that supports the CCOs in fulfilling the additional
obligations and duties imposed by the CIA.64 The compliance committee is usually
chaired by the CCO.
CIAs can include specific provisions prescribing the conduct of the boards of
directors.65 For instance, CIAs can mandate the number of board meetings dedicated to
http://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/cia/agreements/Allerga_Executed_CIA_with_Appendices.pdf [hereinafter Allergan
CIA].
58 See HEALTH CARE LITIGATION STRATEGIES, supra note 9.
59 See Employer Beware, supra note 47.
60 In re Pfizer, 722 F. Supp. 2d 453, 457 (S.D.N.Y. 2010).
61 See, e.g., Corp. Integrity Agreement Between the Off. of the Inspector Gen. of the U.S. Dep’t of Health &
Human Servs. and Pfizer Inc., 4 (Aug. 31, 2009), available at
http://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/cia/agreements/pfizer_inc_08312009.pdf [hereinafter Pfizer CIA] (“Prior to the
Effective Date, Pfizer appointed a Chief Compliance Officer and Pfizer shall maintain a Chief Compliance
Officer during the term of the CIA. The Chief Compliance Officer shall be responsible for developing the
requirements set forth in this CIA and with Federal health care program requirements and FDA
requirements.”).
62 Id. (“The Chief Compliance Officer shall be a member of senior management of Pfizer, [. . .] shall make
periodic (at least quarterly) reports regarding compliance matters directly to the [Audit Committee], and
shall be authorized to report on such matters to the Audit Committee at any time [. . .]. The Chief
Compliance Officer shall be responsible for monitoring the day-to-day compliance activities engaged in by
Pfizer as well as for any reporting obligations created under this CIA.”).
63 See, e.g., Corporate Integrity Agreement Between the Off. of the Inspector Gen. of the U.S. Dep’t of
Health & Human Servs. and Medtronic Sofamor Danek USA, Inc., 5 (Jul. 14, 2006), available at
http://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/cia/agreements/Medtronic_and_MSD_CIA.pdf [hereinafter Medtronic CIA].
64 See, e.g., Allergan CIA, supra note 57.
65 See, e.g., Allergan CIA, supra note 57, at 6; Pfizer CIA, supra note 61, at 5; Corporate Integrity
Agreement Between the Off. of the Inspector Gen. of the U.S. Dep’t of Health & Human Servs. and
AstraZeneca LP, 6 (Apr. 26, 2010), available at
http://oig.hhs.gov/fraud/cia/agreements/astrazeneca_04272010.pdf [hereinafter AstraZeneca CIA]. Other
CIAs are silent on board-specific requirements see, e.g., Corporate Integrity Agreement Between the Off. of
the Inspector Gen. of the U.S. Dep’t of Health & Human Servs. and Zimmer, Inc. (Sep. 27, 2007), available
at http://www.justice.gov/usao/nj/Press/files/pdffiles/Older/ZimmerCIA92707.pdf [hereinafter Zimmer
CIA]; Corporate Integrity Agreement Between the Off. of the Inspector Gen. of the U.S. Dep’t of Health &
Human Servs. and DePuy Orthopaedics, Inc. (Aug. 27, 2007), available at
11

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
the review of the company’s compliance program.66 CIAs may even require boards to
adopt specific resolutions to certify the company’s compliance with the CIA and increase
reporting obligations.67 In effect, these provisions allow the government to contractually
determine how and when a board will interact. The certification requirements can lead
directors to require more detailed reports from the corporate officers and take a greater
role in overseeing the company’s compliance with both the CIA and federal regulations.
In addition to increasing board obligations and duties of the CCO, CIAs can
require a number of other compliance measures. Companies operating under a CIA may
be required to develop and implement a written code of conduct,68 often used to define
and explain the role of the CCO.69 A code of conduct implemented under a CIA may
merely require the company’s full compliance with federal, state, and local laws,70 but it
can also demand compliance with FDA requirements,71 or require compliance with
voluntary codes.72 Codes of conduct also list the consequences of noncompliance with
the company’s policies and procedures, the federal health care program, or FDA
requirements.73 Codes of conduct should encourage disclosure of compliance issues and
protect whistle blowers from retaliation by maintaining the anonymity of disclosures.74
Other CIA provisions require companies to self-report compliance issues to the
government, notify the government of communications with the FDA, field force
monitoring, monitor non-promotional activities, provide mandatory compliance training
and education for employees, upgrade review procedures, increase disclosure programs,
define ineligible persons for employment, and report physician payments.75 All of these
additional requirements, especially the self-reporting provisions, require companies to
http://www.justice.gov/usao/nj/Press/files/pdffiles/Older/DePuyCIA92707.pdf [hereinafter DePuy CIA];
Medtronic CIA, supra note 63.
66 See, e.g., Allergan CIA, supra note 57, at 6 (“The Board must meet at least quarterly to review and
oversee Allergan’s Compliance Program, including but not limited to evaluating its effectiveness and
receiving updates about the activities of the Chief Compliance Officer and other compliance personnel.” ).
67 See, e.g., AstraZeneca CIA, supra note 65, at 6-7 (“[This resolution] shall be signed by each individual
member of the Board or the Committee, summarizing its review and oversight of matters relating to
AstraZeneca’s compliance with Federal health care program requirements, FDA requirements, and the
obligations of this CIA. […The CIA goes on set forth the required minimum language to be used in this
resolution:] The Board of Directors [or a Committee of the Board] has made a reasonable inquiry into the
operations of AstraZeneca LP and AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP’s Compliance Program for the
Corporate Integrity Agreement AstraZeneca period ____, including but not limited to evaluating its
effectiveness and receiving updates about the activities of its U.S. Compliance Officer and other
compliance personnel. Based on its inquiry, the Board [or the Committee] has concluded that, to the best
of its knowledge, AstraZeneca LP and AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP have implemented an effective
U.S. Compliance Program to meet Federal health care program requirements, FDA requirements, and the
obligations of the Corporate Integrity Agreement. If the Board cannot certify such a conclusion in the
required resolution, it must set forth the reasons why it is unable to do so and the steps it is taking to ensure
compliance with the CIA.”).
68 See, e.g., Medtronic CIA, supra note 63, at 6.
69 See, e.g., Pfizer CIA, supra note 61, at 8.
70 See, e.g., DePuy CIA, supra note 65, at 4.
71 See, e.g., Allergan CIA, supra note 57, at 8.
72 See, e.g., DePuy CIA, supra note 65, at 4.
73 Id.
74 See, e.g., AstraZeneca CIA, supra note 65, at 9.
75 Id. at 37-39.
12

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
spend additional resources and, at times, alter their day-to-day operations after signing a
CIA.76
IV. The Role of CIAs in Expanding Fiduciary Duties
Courts differentiate between the law and aspirational corporate governance.77
Corporate fiduciary duties and remedies for duty violations are not aspirational goals of
ideal corporate governance practices.78 Aspirational ideas for boards’ corporate
governance practices do not define standards of liability.79 Although CIAs are not laws,
they do go beyond aspirational governance standards. CIAs set forth concrete
governance rules that expand the fiduciary duties of directors. CIAs more clearly define
the duties of directors to be informed, exercise oversight, and establish effective reporting
systems – requiring a higher standard of care for directors operating under a CIA.
Several characteristics distinguish CIAs from both the fiduciary duties doctrine
and from regular contracts. Unlike the traditional fiduciary duties doctrine, CIAs set out
mandatory and clearly defined best practices for companies. Unlike private contracts,
companies execute CIAs to avoid further prosecution by the government for various
health care fraud charges and to avoid being excluded from Medicaid and Medicare. If
the government decides a CIA is warranted, the company’s hands are tied if it wants to
continue to operate within its industry. CIAs combine elements of contractual and public
enforcement. As a contractual arrangement, the terms of the CIA between the company
and the government dictate heightened compliance duties for the company. Unlike
regular contractual arrangements, however, the enforcement of CIAs goes beyond
contractual remedies. The OIG may enforce CIAs and private rights of action may also
come into play. Because of the combination of enforcement mechanisms, CIAs are more
than contractual arrangements. A breach of a CIA may be treated like a breach of law for
purposes of the duty of care. Under Delaware law, CIAs may not only be enforced by the
OIG, but also by the courts via a derivative suit.
1. Contractual Addendum to Increase Duties
In lieu of a special hybrid category for CIAs, they are first and foremost contracts.
As contracts, CIAs can create a contractual addendum to existing legal duties. To the
extent that CIAs mandate specific actions in the day-to-day operations of boards of
directors, CIAs can expand boards’ duties. For instance, while there is no federal law
mandating the reporting of payments to physicians, CIAs can and often do require such
disclosures.80 Another example entails boards’ liability for illegal marketing. Although
76 See Corporate Integrity Agreements, METRICSTREAM,
http://www.metricstream.com/solution_briefs/corporate-integrity-agreements.htm (last visited Aug. 5,
2013) (explaining that the additional costs and day-to-day impact of CIAs is enough that some
entrepreneurial companies are targeting companies operating under a CIA in order to help them streamline
their compliance processes)..
77 In re Johnson & Johnson Derivative Litig., 865 F. Supp. 2d 545 (D. N.J. 2011).
78 Brehm v. Eisner, 746 A.2d 244 (Del. 2000).
79 Id. at 255-56; In re J & J, 865 F. Supp. 2d. at 11.
80 Medicare, Medicaid, Children's Health Insurance Programs; Transparency Reports
and Reporting of Physician Ownership or Investment Interests, 78 Fed. Reg. 9,458 (Feb. 8, 2013) (to be
codified at 42 C.F.R. Pts. 402 and 403); see also AstraZeneca CIA, supra note 65, at 37-39.
13

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
federal law prohibits off-label marketing of drugs and devices,81 boards are consistently
held not liable for companies’ illegal marketing efforts.82 However, boards that certify
compliance with a CIA are certifying that the company is properly monitoring the
promotional activities of its sales teams. Through such certifications, CIAs contractually
expand the applicable legal standards for boards.
CIAs can contractually expand directors’ duties beyond the Caremark standard
and its progeny. Several CIA features suggest that directors are held to a higher standard
after a CIA has been executed. Individual CIA provisions can put boards on notice,
highlight extra care requirements in specific areas of operation, and enable the board to
increase their knowledge of the corporation’s activities and corresponding compliance
requirements, making it easier to carefully and effectively monitor the organization.
More specifically, because CIAs often mandate a CCO and dictate how the CCO interacts
with the board, CIAs can increase boards’ knowledge and monitoring of the company’s
compliance.83 If a board possesses such knowledge, it should play a bigger role in
ensuring that the company meets federal and state standards. Moreover, CIAs often
require boards to pass specific resolutions certifying compliance.84 Besides increasing
boards’ operational knowledge (thus allowing for a more comprehensive approach to
governance), CIAs also demand assurances that boards are meeting their fiduciary duties.
CIA provisions can create economic incentives that affect directors’ diligence in
exercising their duties. CIAs can have harsh economic consequences for companies.
CIAs provide for penalties in cases of noncompliance. Companies agree in their
respective CIA to pay penalties for each day of noncompliance with the agreement.
Penalties can add up to thousands of dollars per day.85 Additionally, most federal health
law regulations provide for monetary penalties in cases of noncompliance. Because of the
required self-reporting, a company operating under a CIA may be required to report
violations of the False Claims Act, Sunshine, Stark, AKS, HIPAA, or other federal health
laws. Adding the stipulated penalties in CIAs to the monetary penalties under federal
health laws, companies that executed CIAs face significant financial ramifications.
2. Delineating the Role of CIAs in Fiduciary Duties
Caremark underscores that a lack of oversight claim “is possibly the most
difficult theory in corporation law upon which a plaintiff might hope to win judgment.”86
Courts dismiss duty of care cases routinely at the pleading stage.87
81 The Criminal and Civil False Claims Acts, 18 U.S.C. § 287 (2006), 31 U.S.C. 3729 et. Seq. (2006), and
31 U.S.C. § 3730 (2006).
82 See Markewich v. Collins, 622 F. Supp. 2d 802 (D. Minn. 2009); In re J & J, 865 F. Supp. 2d.; King v.
Baldino, 648 F. Supp. 2d 609 (D. Del. 2009). .
83 See, e.g., Pfizer CIA, supra note 61, at 4.
84 See, e.g., AstraZeneca CIA, supra note 65, at 6.
85 Id.
86 In re Caremark Int’l. Inc. Derivative Litig., 698 A.2d 959, 967 (Del. Ch. 1996).
87 A number of recent cases illustrate that courts have not allowed breach of fiduciary duty suits to proceed
when plaintiffs did not make demand upon the boards and failed to adequately plead demand futility. See
King v. Baldino, 648 F.Supp.2d 609, 610 (D. Del. 2009) (dismissing the complaint on the basis that
plaintiff did not adequately plead demand futility; quoting Stone v. Ritter, 911 A.2d at 373.)
With the benefit of hindsight, the plaintiffs’ complaint seeks to equate a bad outcome
with bad faith. The lacuna in the plaintiffs’ argument is a failure to recognize that the directors’
good faith exercise of oversight responsibility may not invariably prevent employees from
14

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
Courts, however, treat companies that executed a CIA differently. Courts are
increasingly recognizing the role of CIAs and their implications for directors’ fiduciary
duties. A prominent recent decision, In re Pfizer,88 illustrates the role of CIAs in the
evolution of fiduciary duties. Although the court in Pfizer did not conclude that the CIAs
actually created fiduciary duties, the court opined that the CIAs “imposed affirmative
obligations on Pfizer's board that went well beyond the basic fiduciary duties required by
Delaware law.”89 A broader reading of this phraseology suggests that fiduciary duties
could perhaps be augmented by contractual arrangements such as CIAs. Following this
reasoning, it seems possible that future courts could interpret CIAs as expanding the basic
legal duty of care.
In a case with fairly egregious facts, the New Jersey District Court dismissed a
derivative complaint against the Johnson & Johnson (J&J) board for failure to plead
demand.90 Plaintiffs alleged that the J&J directors breached their fiduciary duty “by
permitting and fostering a culture of systematic, calculated and widespread legal
violations.”91 No CIA had been executed before the alleged misconduct. Plaintiffs did
not make demand on the board before filing suit.92 Plaintiffs’ allegations state that
directors should have known about the company’s questionable acts because J&J
received FDA warning letters, an FDA report, subpoenas from the state attorney general,
qui tam complaints, a criminal plea, and a settlement agreement with the Department of
Justice.93 The court looked to Brehm v. Eisner94 to analyze the case, given the “weighty
allegations of corporate misconduct and director inaction.”95 The Brehm court described
its case as a case concerning whether directors may be held personally liable for lack of
due care in the corporate decision-making process – not as a case about whether the
directors failed to establish and implement ideal corporate governance practices.96 The
Brehm court stipulated: “the law of corporate fiduciary duties and remedies for violation
of those duties are distinct from the aspirational goals of ideal corporate governance
practices,” meaning that “aspirational ideas of good corporate governance practices for
boards of directors . . . are not required by the corporation law and do not define
standards of liability.”97 The court explained that it found these words appropriate when
the complaint alleged that the J&J board failed to live up to aspirational ideals, but failed
violating criminal laws, or from causing the corporation to incur significant financial liability, or
both, as occurred in . . . this very case.
See also Markewich v. Collins, 622 F.Supp.2d 802 (D. Minn. 2009) (finding that the complaint did not
plead sufficient facts to allow the inference that the directors operated under a “sustained or systematic
failure” to exercise oversight; quoting Desimone v. Barrows, 924 A.2d 908, 940 (Del. Ch. 2007)
“Delaware courts routinely reject the conclusory allegation that because illegal behavior occurred, internal
controls must have been deficient, and the board must have known so.”) In a pre-CIA setting, both the
Baldino and the Markewich court did not allow an assumption of director wrongdoing just because
improper behavior occurred.
88 In re Pfizer, 722 F. Supp. 2d 453, 461 (S.D.N.Y. 2010).
89 Id. at 461.
90 In re Johnson & Johnson Derivative Litig., 865 F. Supp. 2d 545, 549 (D. N.J. 2011).
91 Id.
92 Id.
93 Id. at 550.
94 Brehm v. Eisner, 746 A.2d 244 (Del. 2000).
95 In re Johnson & Johnson Derivative Litig., 865 F. Supp. 2d. at 559. .
96 Id. (quoting Brehm, 746 A.2d at 255-256).
97 Id.
15

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
to allege that the directors acted in bad faith in order violate their fiduciary duties.98 The
court here differentiates between the law and aspirational corporate governance.
However, when a company is operating under a CIA, the distinction between the law and
aspirational governance is less clear.
The In re Pfizer derivative suit followed a number of settlement agreements
between Pfizer and the Department of Justice, including a 2009 settlement of $2.3 billion,
consisting of the largest criminal fine ever imposed in the United States ($1.195 billion)
and the largest civil fraud settlement in history against a pharmaceutical company of $1
billion.99 Following settlement agreements in 2002, 2004, and again in 2009, Pfizer
signed three separate CIAs with the OIG.100 Among other allegations, Plaintiffs alleged
that Pfizer’s directors breached their fiduciary duties by causing or consciously
disregarding the illegal marketing activities that led in part to the staggering 2009
settlement.101 Plaintiffs did not issue a demand upon the board of directors.102 When
analyzing whether demand was futile, the court noted that “many of [the] disturbing
reports [of noncompliance] were received during the same time that the board was
obligated by the 2002 and 2004 CIAs to pay special attention to these very problems.”103
This language is significant. The court stipulates that in the case of a company
that executed a CIA, it will allow an assumption that the directors were fully informed,
and thus, willing participants in the corporate malfeasance. For this reason, the court
found that the “plaintiffs have pleaded with sufficient particularity that a majority of
directors faced a substantial likelihood of personal liability because they deliberately
disregarded reports of the illegal marketing practices eventually resulting in the 2009
settlement.”104 In this case, the CIAs became the court’s proof that the directors could
very well have breached their fiduciary duties.
The court in In re Pfizer cited In re Abbott Laboratories Derivative Shareholders
Litigation105 [hereinafter Abbott Labs], a case that perhaps sets the stage for the In re
Pfizer holding. In Abbott Labs, the Seventh Circuit reversed the dismissal of a
shareholder suit for breach of fiduciary duty for failure to adequately plead demand
futility.106 In their complaint, Plaintiffs alleged that Abbott directors breached their
98 Id.
99 In re Pfizer, 722 F. Supp. 2d 453, 455-57 (S.D.N.Y. 2010).
100 Id. at 457.
101 Id.
102 Id. at 458.
103 Id. The court explained: “As illustrated by the sheer size of the 2009 fines, the wrongdoing here
alleged was not only pervasive throughout Pfizer but also was committed in the face of the board's
repeated promises to closely monitor and prevent such misconduct, as required by the 2002 and
2004 CIAs. These CIAs, which were part of larger settlements approved by the Pfizer board, imposed
affirmative obligations on Pfizer's board that went well beyond the basic fiduciary duties required by
Delaware law. Among other things, these agreements obligated Pfizer's chief Compliance Officer to
report directly to the board the allegations of misconduct here at issue so that the board could deal
with them directly, rather than relying on management. There is no reason to believe this reporting
requirement was not fully complied with, thus guaranteeing that each member of the board was
bombarded with allegations of continuing misconduct of the very kind that the prior settlements
looked to the board to prevent.” Id. at 460-61.
104 Id. at 462.
105 In re Abbott Labs. Derivative S’holders Litig , 325 F.3d at 795.
106 Id. at 811.
16

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
fiduciary duty when directors were aware of a six-year history of noncompliance with the
FDA yet failed to take corrective action to prevent further problems, leading to a $100
million fine – then the largest penalty ever imposed for FDA violations.107 Plaintiffs
alleged directors were aware of and should have corrected the problems because Abbott
entered into a Voluntary Compliance Plan with the FDA to address areas of
noncompliance six years prior to the FDA filing the injunction that led to the $100
million fine.108 Plaintiffs argued that demand would have been futile because the board
members knew of the continuing noncompliance with the FDA regulations. Furthermore,
they knew that such noncompliance would lead to severe penalties because of the
enhanced government oversight facilitated by Abbott’s Voluntary Compliance Program
(VCP) with the FDA, yet still ignored the FDA’s repeated warnings and chose not to stop
the problematic conduct.109 The Seventh Circuit agreed and held that it was possible the
Abbott directors breached their duty.110 Although the Voluntary Compliance Plan was
not a CIA, the Seventh Circuit used it as evidence that the directors knew of and should
have stopped noncompliant activities.
To summarize, courts assume that the boards of companies that executed a CIA
have more knowledge and can exercise more control and should thus act with a
heightened fiduciary duty. Directors are held to a higher standard if the company
executed a CIA. The courts in In re Pfizer and Abbott Labs found that Pfizer’s CIA and
Abbott’s VCP increased the boards’ knowledge about compliance issues and the directors
should have increased their monitoring to prevent further violations.111 Both courts did
not accept the directors’ arguments that they did not know about the noncompliance
because executing a CIA or CIA-like agreement means directors do know or should
know about the respective noncompliance issues.
The Pfizer and Abbot Labs decisions suggest that CIAs and VCPs can change
courts’ evaluations of fiduciary duties. Courts assume that boards operating under CIAs
have more knowledge and exercise more control. However, it is unclear if corporations
with CIAs will be uniformly affected. In light of the Pfizer precedent, future courts could
hold directors of corporations that executed CIAs to a higher standard and thereby
expand their basic legal duty of care if the facts suggest that CIAs provided directors with
more knowledge about compliance activities.112
107 Id. at 801-02.
108 Id. at 800-01.
109 Id. at 802.
110 In re Abbott Labs. Derivative S’holders Litig , 325 F.3d at 809 (“Given the extensive paper trail in
Abbott concerning the violations and the inferred awareness of the problems, the facts support a reasonable
assumption that there was a ‘sustained and systematic failure of the board to exercise oversight,’ in this
case intentional in that the directors knew of the violations of law, took no steps in an effort to prevent or
remedy the situation, and that failure to take any action for such an inordinate amount of time resulted in
substantial corporate losses, establishing a lack of good faith. We find that six years of noncompliance,
inspections, 483s, Warning Letters, and notice in the press, all of which then resulted in the largest civil
fine ever imposed by the FDA and the destruction and suspension of products which accounted for
approximately $250 million in corporate assets, indicate that the directors’ decision to not act was not made
in good faith and was contrary to the best interests of the company.”)
111 See In re Pfizer, 722 F. Supp. 2d 453, 461 (S.D.N.Y. 2010); In re Abbott Labs. Derivative S’holders
Litig., 325 F.3d at 809.
112 See Pfizer CIA, supra note 61, at 4-5 (The Pfizer CIA contains a number of requirements that seem to
ensure a well-informed board. First, the CIA requires the Chief Compliance officer to report directly to the
17

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
3. Limitations
Several important conceptual and legal distinctions separate the fiduciary duties
created under Delaware precedent and the contractual obligations under CIAs. CIAs have
so far been predominantly used in the health care industry.113 Health care companies
serve the greater good and their mission goes beyond the mere maximization of
shareholder value.114 Directors acting on behalf of corporations in the health care industry
face unique challenges. Like other directors, directors in the health care industry are
required to make well-informed decisions, oversee the business,115 and ensure their
respective corporations comply with the law.116 However, the unique features of a health
Chief Executive Officer of Pfizer and make at least quarterly reports on compliance matters to the Audit
Committee of the Board. Second, the CIA requires the Audit Committee to meet at least quarterly to review
Pfizer’s Compliance Program, including receiving updates on its effectiveness. And third, the CIA requires
the Audit Committee to certify that it has made reasonable inquiries into the Compliance Program and that
Pfizer is meeting the obligations of the CIA. With each certification, Pfizer’s directors are promising that
they are exercising proper oversight, and acting with adequate knowledge); see also In re Pfizer, 722 F.
Supp. 2d at 461 (“[T]here is no reason to believe this reporting requirement was not fully complied with,
thus guaranteeing that each member of the board was bombarded with allegations of continuing misconduct
of the very kind that the prior settlements looked to the board to prevent.”).
113 See Barnali Choudhury, Serving Two Masters: Incorporating Social Responsibility Into the Corporate
Paradigm, 11 U. PA. J. BUS. L. 631 (2009) (“[T]he purpose of the corporation shapes the normative content
of corporate law and the roles and obligations of corporate managers.”).
114 The Medtronic Mission Statement illustrates the idea that a health care corporation can (and should)
strive for more than just profits:
To contribute to human welfare by application of biomedical engineering in the research, design,
manufacture, and sale of instruments or appliances that alleviate pain, restore health, and extend
life. To direct our growth in the areas of biomedical engineering where we display maximum
strength and ability; to gather people and facilities that tend to augment these areas; to
continuously build on these areas through education and knowledge assimilation; to avoid
participation in areas where we cannot make unique and worthy contributions. To strive without
reserve for the greatest possible reliability and quality in our products; to be the unsurpassed
standard of comparison and to be recognized as a company of dedication, honesty, integrity, and
service. To make a fair profit on current operations to meet our obligations, sustain our growth,
and reach our goals. To recognize the personal worth of employees by providing an employment
framework that allows personal satisfaction in work accomplished, security, advancement
opportunity, and means to share in the company's success. To maintain good citizenship as a
company
Our Mission, MEDTRONIC (Jan. 23, 2013), http://www.medtronic.com/about-medtronic/our-
mission/index.htm [hereinafter Medtronic Mission Statement].
The directors are an essential part of such mission: “The corporate director . . . is a bedrock of the health
care delivery system. The oversight activities provided by the director help form the corporate vision, and
at the same time promote an environment of corporate responsibility that protects the mission of the
corporation and the health care consumers it serves.” OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GEN. OF THE U.S. DEP’T
HEALTH & HUMAN SERVS. AND AM. HEALTH LAWYERS ASS’N, CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY AND
CORPORATE COMPLIANCE: A RESOURCE FOR HEALTH CARE BOARDS OF DIRECTORS 11 (last visited Aug. 5,
2013)[hereinafter Corporate Responsibility]
http://www.healthlawyers.org/hlresources/PI/InfoSeries/Documents/OIG_CorpRespCorpCompliance.pdf.
115 Corporate Responsibility, supra note 114, at 8-9 (“In the health care context, the duty of care arises in
either the decision-making function or the oversight function. The decision-making function applies to a
particular situation or a specific action. The duty of care principle in the oversight function pertains to the
general activity of overseeing the day-to-day functions of the business.”).
116 Gabriel L. Imperato & Marc S. Raspanti, Compliance and Governance for Health Care Organization
and Marketing and Sales Activities, 11 J. HEALTH CARE COMPLIANCE 5, 8 (2009).
18

CORPORATE INTEGRITY AGREEMENTS
care corporation, in combination with a complex array of federal and state health care
legislation,117 create special challenges for directors in the health care industry. Directors
of health care corporations balance the needs of many stakeholders: patients, physicians,
taxpayers, the government, shareholders, and many more. Even small health care
companies have a global reach and their directors’ decisions can affect a broad array of
constituents.118 Substantial government involvement and liability through Medicare and
Medicaid further complicates governance of health care providers because the taxpaying
public is a stakeholder.119
Given the public good or quasi-public good character of the health care industry,
the application of CIAs in industries outside of health care could be limited. Without
broader application in other industries, the impact of CIAs on corporate law may be
limited.
V. Conclusion
CIAs add an important element to the academic debate on the expansion of
fiduciary duties. As a unique hybrid category, CIAs transcend the law of fiduciary duties
and aspirational corporate governance. Courts are increasingly recognizing the role of
CIAs and their capacity to expand directors’ fiduciary duties. A broad reading of In re
Pfizer suggests that CIAs can augment fiduciary default duties. Given the characteristics
of CIAs and courts’ increasing recognition of CIAs and VCPs, courts may interpret CIAs
and other hybrid forms, such as deferred prosecution agreements, as expanding the basic
legal duty of care. More research and empirical work may be needed to explore how
CIAs and other hybrid forms may change or expand directors’ obligations.
117 See Federal Anti-Kickback Statute (“AKS”), 42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b (2006). Physician Self-Referral
Statute, 42 U.S.C. § 1395nn(a) (2006); Criminal and Civil False Claims Acts, 18 U.S.C. § 287 (2006); 31
U.S.C. 3729 et. seq. (2006); 31 U.S.C. § 3730 (2006); Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act,
18 U.S.C. § 1347 (2006); or Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, Pub. L. No. 111-148, 124 Stat.
119-124 (codified as amended in scattered sections of 42 U.S.C.).
118 The decisions made by health care corporations have real costs for American taxpayers. See Preventing
Health Care Fraud: New Tools and Approaches to Combat Old Challenges: Testimony Before the S.
Comm. on Fin. (Mar. 2, 2011) (statement of Daniel R. Levinson, Inspector General), available at
http://www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/2011/03/t20110302i.html (“For example, in August 2010, Allergan, Inc.,
agreed to plead guilty to misdemeanor misbranding and paid $600 million (including a $375 million
criminal fine and forfeiture and a $225 million civil settlement) to resolve criminal and civil liability arising
from the company’s promotion of Botox®. Our investigations found that the company illegally marketed
the drug for indications that, during the relevant time periods, had not been approved as safe and effective
by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). These unapproved indications included headache, pain,
spasticity and juvenile cerebral palsy. In addition, the settlement resolved allegations that Allergan misled
doctors about the safety and efficacy of Botox®, instructed doctors to miscode claims to ensure payment by
Government health care programs, and paid kick backs to doctors.”).
119 See Social Security and Medicare Boards of Trustees, Status of the Social Security and Medicare
Programs: A Summary of the 2013 Annual Reports, SOC. SEC. ADMIN.,
http://www.ssa.gov/oact/TRSUM/tr13summary.pdf (last visited Aug. 5, 2013) (explaining that the annual
total cost of Medicare is projected to begin exceeding the total non-interest income in the near future).
19

