DECENTRALIZED MECHANICAL TURK THROUGH VERIFIED REPUTATION
Decentralized Mechanical Turk through Verified Reputation
Wulf A. Kaal*
ABSTRACT
Centralized mechanical turk solutions are subject to significant
shortcomings. Decentralized crypto solutions can optimize the mechanical
turk market. Autonomous decentralized protocols for validating domain
specific reputation of workers that perform tasks allow such micro task
workers to stake tokens in order to prove the validity of their tasks and earn
a reusable computed reputation score. Such decentralized crypto solutions
enhance the cost-efficiency of mechanical turk work while democratizing
access for reputation verified workers.
Key Words: Mechanical Turk, Micro Tasks, Decentralization, Blockchain,
Distributed Ledger Technology, Regulation, Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, Data Science, Data Scientists, Innovation, Entrepreneur, Start-up,
Big Data, Crytpo Economics, Semada, Platform, Democratization
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
* © 2018 Wulf A. Kaal. Professor, University of Saint Thomas School of Law and
Director of the Private Investment Funds Institute, Minneapolis.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

Table of Contents
(cid:0)
1 PROBLEMS IN CENTRALIZED MECHANICAL TURK ......................................... 3
2 DECENTRALIZED SOLUTIONS FOR MECHANICAL TURK .............................. 8
3 SEMADA PLATFORM .................................................................................................... 11
3.2 REPUTATION STAKING MECHANISM ..................................................................................... 12
3.3 REPUTATION SCORE .................................................................................................................. 12
3.4 PAYMENT SYSTEM..................................................................................................................... 13
3.5 GAMIFICATION OF MICRO TASKS .......................................................................................... 14
4 INNOVATING THE MECHANICAL TURK MARKET .......................................... 15
4.1 NO PLATFORM FEES .................................................................................................................. 15
4.2 TRANSACTION COST REMOVAL.............................................................................................. 16
4.3 OPTIMIZED USER INTERFACE .................................................................................................. 16
4.4 WORKER ANONYMITY INCREASES PARTICIPATION ........................................................... 17
6 OUTLOOK ......................................................................................................................... 18
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

1 Problems in Centralized Mechanical Turk
The growth in freelance work is a global trend.1 According to some studies,
over 40% of the American workforce will be freelancers by 2020.2 Freelance
work allows individuals to pursue their passions, create flexible
opportunities to make a living, and enables people to truly advance
themselves and their families. Technology and automation play a much
larger role in the workplace than even five years ago, rendering the
traditional work schedule nearly obsolete across industries while
maintaining operational efficiencies and reducing costs.3 Task performers or
workers are no longer bound by geographical location and task requesters
are able to hire from the growing global talent pool of freelancers.4 In the
current freelancer market, leading centralized platforms Fiverr, Taskrabbit,
Upwork, Crowdflower and Mechanical Turk have their workforces
distributed throughout the world. Micro Tasks freelance work is becoming
increasingly important in the freelance market.5
Micro tasks are defined as small tasks that require human judgment, can be
completed by humans independently over the internet, and are part of a
1 Shoshana Deutschkron, New Study Finds Freelance Economy Grew to 55 Million
Americans Shis Year, 35% of Total U.S. Workforce, UPWORK: PRESS (Oct. 6, 2016),
https://www.upwork.com/press/2016/10/06/freelancing-in-america-2016/; Self-
employment rate, THE ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
(OECD): DATA (Jan. 25, 2018), https://data.oecd.org/emp/self-employment-rate.htm;
Nathan Heller, Is the Gig Economy Working?, THE NEW YORKER, May 15, 2017,
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/05/15/is-the-gig-economy-working; Aaron
Smith, Shared, Collaborative, and On Demand: The New Digital Economy, PEW
RESEARCH CENTER (May 19, 2016), http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/05/19/the-new-
digital-economy/; Sonal Khetarpal, The Rise of the Freelancer, BUSINESS TODAY (April
24, 2016),
http://www.businesstoday.in/magazine/features/companies-are-hiring-more-freelancers-
than-ever/story/230742.html.
2 INTUIT, Dispatches from the new Economy: The On-Demand Workforce, (Second Annual
Report, Feb. 21, 2017), https://www.slideshare.net/IntuitInc/dispatches-from-the-new-
economy-the-ondemand-workforce-72248688/1.
Intuit 2020 Report: TWENTY TRENDS THAT WILL SHAPE THE NEXT DECADE, Intuit (Oct.
2010), http://http-
download.intuit.com/http.intuit/CMO/intuit/futureofsmallbusiness/intuit_2020_report.pdf.
3 Jonathan Millet, STORM Tokens in the Freelance Marketplace Enhances Efficiency and
Profitability, NEWSBTC (Dec. 7, 2017), http://www.newsbtc.com/2017/12/07/storm-
tokens-freelance-marketplace/.
4 STORMX, INC. Storm Token: White Paper, Market Research, Network Development
Plans, and Marketing Materials (Oct. 16, 2017),
https://s3.amazonaws.com/cakecodes/pdf/storm_web/STORM_Token_White_Paper_Mark
et_Research_Network_Development_vFINAL.pdf.
5 THE WORLD BANK, FEASIBILITY STUDY: MICROWORK FOR THE PALESTINIAN
TERRITORIES, 2013,
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/529481468140639204/pdf/ACS36850ESW0P
1015B00PUBLIC00A9R7B83.pdf.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

larger unified project.6 Because of the necessity of human judgment that
cannot currently be replaced by machines/computers, micro tasks enable
organizations to build products or create outcomes that cannot be synthesized
by machines/computers alone.7 For example, the Chinese government uses
2 million micro task workers to aid in censoring the internet.8 Internet
companies, such as Google, Facebook, Twitter, Ebay, and Linkedin optimize
their production ready solutions and enhance their AI model training with
micro task workers.9 Large scale distributions of machine learning
researchers, among others, gather structured labeled data for artificial
intelligence (AI) training purposes through the use of micro task workers.10
Billions of micro tasks are completed each year and the demand for micro
task workers is increasing consistently. In an attempt to capitalize on the
growing demand for micro task work, Amazon created Amazon Mechanical
Turk (MTurk) in 2005.11 MTurk is an online marketplace that allows
requesters to pay workers for performing micro tasks online, thus
crowdsource data collection. The World Bank concluded in a 2015 report,
that the largest crowdsourced data collection platforms Amazon Mechanical
Turk and CrowdFlower, a venture backed company that raised over $58
6 AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL, Microtasking, THE ENGINE ROOM LIBRARY (last visited Jan.
25, 2018), https://library.theengineroom.org/microtasking/.
7 Cole, F., Sanik, K., DeCarlo, D., Finkelstein, A., Funkhouser, T., Rusinkiewicz, S., and
Singh, M. How Well Do Line Drawings Depict Shape?, ACM SIGGRAPH (2009), 1–9;
Callison-Burch, C. Fast, Cheap, and Creative: Evaluating Translation Quality Using
Amazon's Mechanical Turk, in 1 PROCEEDINGS OF THE 2009 CONFERENCE ON EMPIRICAL
METHODS IN NATURAL LANGUAGE PROCESSING 286 (2009); Horton, J. J., Rand, D.G. and
Zeckhauser, R.J., The Online Laboratory: Conducting Experiments in a Real Labor
Market (National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 15961, 2010); Kittur, A.,
Chi, E., Suh, B. Crowdsourcing User Studies With Mechanical Turk, Proceedings of
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 453 (2008),
http://delivery.acm.org/10.1145/1360000/1357127/p453-
kittur.pdf?ip=140.209.181.61&id=1357127&acc=ACTIVE%20SERVICE&key=70F2FD
C0A279768C%2ECD0A7109D1C458E3%2E4D4702B0C3E38B35%2E4D4702B0C3E3
8B35&__acm__=1517258739_5d051dc3294d8ac7c245ec3c954d350d.
8 Katie Hung & CY Xu, China “Employs 2 Million to Police Internet”, CNN (Oct. 7,
2013), https://www.cnn.com/2013/10/07/world/asia/china-internet-monitors/index.html
(those who pass an exam will gather opinions and attitudes of Internet users, organize
them into reports, and submit them to decision-makers. At present, there are about 2
million people in this occupation in the country); China Employs Two Million Microblog
Monitors State Media Say, BBC NEWS, (Oct. 4, 2013), http://www.bbc.com/news/world-
asia-china-24396957l Cate Cadell & Pei Li, Team and Tiananmen: Inside China’s new
censorship machine, REUTERS (Sept. 29, 2017, 1:32 AM),
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-congress-censorship-insight/tea-and-tiananmen-
inside-chinas-new-censorship-machine-idUSKCN1C40LL
9 CROWDFLOWER, Success Stories, https://www.crowdflower.com/success-stories/.
10 Jason Pontin, Artificial Intelligence, With Help From the Humans, THE NEW YORK
TIMES (Mar. 25, 2007),
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/25/business/yourmoney/25Stream.html.
11 AMAZON MECHANICAL TURK, www.mturk.com;
Paul Hitlin, What is Mechanical Turk? PEW RESEARCH CENTER (July 11, 2016),
http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/07/11/what-is-mechanical-turk/.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

million12 and is focused on enriching data used for AI, would quadruple their
revenue from 2013 to 2016.13
The increasing demand for micro task workers that came initially from data
scientists and other academics is further increased by the growth of artificial
intelligence (AI) and the increasing scope and scale of AI applications in a
broad range of industries.14 Fortune 500 tech companies including Amazon,
Apple, Google Alphabet, Twitter, and Facebook use AI and machine
learning to improve their services and cut costs, thus increasing profitability
exponentially.15 According to some estimates, Fortune 500 tech companies
spent between $20 and $30 billion on the development and enhancement of
their AI systems in 2016.16 More recent data for 2017 suggests that this trend
is continuing and increasing.17 AI is already playing a significant role in
consumer expectations and tech companies have the best possible set of
incentives to keep investing in AI to fulfill such expectations and develop
new products at marginal cost.18
12 Julie Bort, Founder of $110 Million Startup CrowdFlower: I’m Forever Grateful to
Travis Kalanick, BUS. INSIDER (Oct. 15, 2017, 11:00 AM),
http://www.businessinsider.com/crowdflower-founder-learned-from-travis-kalanick-2017-
10
13Siou Chew Kuek et al., The Global Opportunity in Online Outsourcing, WORLD BANK
GROUP (June 2015),
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/138371468000900555/pdf/ACS14228-ESW-
white-cover-P149016-Box391478B-PUBLIC-World-Bank-Global-OO-Study-WB-Rpt-
FinalS.pdf.
14 Jacques Bughin et al., How Artificial Intelligence Can Deliver Real Value to
Companies, MCKINSEY & COMPANY (Jun. 2017),
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/mckinsey-analytics/our-insights/how-
artificial-intelligence-can-deliver-real-value-to-companies; Dmitry Matskevich, Low-Wage
Workers Drive the Global AI Labor Market, VENTUREBEAT (Dec. 12, 2017, 12:10 PM),
https://venturebeat.com/2017/12/12/low-wage-workers-drive-the-global-ai-labor-market/.
15 Cade Metz, Google, Facebook, and Microsoft are Remaking Themselves Around AI,
WIRED (Nov. 21, 2016, 7:00 AM), https://www.wired.com/2016/11/google-facebook-
microsoft-remaking-around-ai/.
Joe McKendrick, Artificial Intelligence Doesn’t Just Cut Costs, It Expands Business
Brainpower, FORBES (Jan 24, 2017, 12:03 PM),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/joemckendrick/2017/01/24/artificial-intelligence-doesnt-
just-cut-costs-it-expands-business-brainpower/#29a22aa8535a.
16 Bughin, supra.; Louis Columbus, McKinsey’s State of Machine Learning and AI, 2017,
FORBES (Jul. 9, 2017, 9:36 AM),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/louiscolumbus/2017/07/09/mckinseys-state-of-machine-
learning-and-ai-2017/#30d75fbb75b6.
17 INTERNATIONAL DATA CORPORATION (IDC), Worldwide Spending on Cognitive and
Artificial Intelligence Systems Forecast to Reach $12.5 Billion This Year, According to
New IDC Spending Guide (Apr. 3, 2017),
https://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS42439617 (worldwide revenues for
cognitive and AI solutions are forecasted to continue to see significant corporate
investment over the next several years).
18 Nick Johnson, How Your Customers’ Expectations Have Changed in the Age of the
Customer, SALESFORCE BLOG (Jul. 7, 2017),
https://www.salesforce.com/blog/2017/07/customers-expectations-in-age-of-the-
customer.html.; Oliver Tan, How AI Can Improve the Customer Experience, FORBES
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

The evolution, improvements, and growth of AI is correlated with the
evolution, improvements, and growth in micro task work. AI uses
supervised and unsupervised as well as reinforcement machine learning.
Because unsupervised and reinforcement learning are much more complex
than supervised learning, supervised learning is to date more common and
more relied upon for AI development. While this may change as
unsupervised and reinforcement learning evolve, currently, supervised
learning depends on labelled data that is produced via micro task work. The
mapping function of the supervised AI learning process necessitates the
analysis of labelled input variables x and corresponding output variables y.
In the supervised learning training phase, the AI neural network examines
the training dataset of labeled x input data to learn to classify the input data
idealistically. The higher the quality and quantity of such labelled datasets
the better the AI neural network’s learning algorithm during the supervised
training process.19 Accordingly, the evolution, improvements, and growth of
AI is correlated with the evolution, improvements, and growth in micro tasks
work.20 But alas, microtasks platform systems are subject to significant
limitations that inhibit the evolution of AI.21
The existing centralized marketplaces for micro task work cannot adequately
fulfil the increasing demand for high quality micro task work for AI labelled
training datasets. First and foremost, the cost structure for micro task work
in centralized systems that necessitate intermediation results in significant
overpricing without benefiting the micro task workers directly. The cost
(Aug. 9, 2017, 8:00 AM),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2017/08/09/how-ai-can-improve-the-
customer-experience/#4dcca41f757d; Amit Sharma, How Predictive AI Will Change
Shopping, HARV. BUS. REV. (Nov. 18, 2016), https://hbr.org/2016/11/how-predictive-ai-
will-change-shopping.
19 Bernard Marr, Supervised v Unsupervised Machine Learning: What’s the Difference,
FORBES (Mar. 16, 2017, 3:13 AM),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2017/03/16/supervised-v-unsupervised-
machine-learning-whats-the-difference/#47e947ea485d.
20 Hope Reese & Nick Heath, Inside Amazon’s Clickworker Platform: How Half a Million
People are Being Paid Pennies to Train AI, TECHREPUBLIC (Dec. 2016),
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/inside-amazons-clickworker-platform-how-half-a-
million-people-are-training-ai-for-pennies-per-task/.
21 Michel Dalle et al., Microwork Platforms as Enablers to new Ecosystems and Business
Models: The Challenge of Managing Difficult Tasks, 75 INT’L J. TECH. MGMT. 55 (2017);
Yang Gao, Yan Chen & K. J. Ray Liu, On Cost-Effective Incentive Mechanisms in
Microtask Crowdsourcing, 7 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
AND AI IN GAMES 3 (Mar. 2015); Winter Mason & Duncan J. Watts, Financial Incentives
and the “Performance of Crowds”, 11 ACM SIGKDD EXPLORATIONS NEWSLETTER 100-
108 (2010), http://delivery.acm.org/10.1145/1810000/1809422/p100-
mason.pdf?ip=140.209.181.61&id=1809422&acc=ACTIVE%20SERVICE&key=70F2FD
C0A279768C%2ECD0A7109D1C458E3%2E4D4702B0C3E38B35%2E4D4702B0C3E3
8B35&__acm__=1517240131_111ce0376ad360b2b87eb813b5552142.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

structure suboptimality can be traced back to several factors.22 All too human
shortcomings of micro task works, such as limited attention span,
irrationality, and inaccuracies result in verification requirements for micro
task work. However, manual verification of micro task work is subject to the
same human limitations. In an attempt to ensure quality of results and
minimize the impact of the human limitations of their workers, requesters in
centralized micro task structures set up teams of up to 15 workers to perform
the same task in an effort to form a consensus.23 The multiplication of work
inherent in this process significantly increases the cost of micro task work.
Requiring requesters to pay proportionally (e.g. up to 15 times) for work per
project result in waste. The necessity of multiplication of work also subjects
micro task workers to lower rates and lack of payment increases. Moreover,
because unmanaged centralized micro task platforms do not supply
consumer interfaces needed to accomplish specific tasks, requesters of micro
task work are forced to either build their own tools24 or pay large fees to
22 AMAZON, INC., Amazon Mechanical Turk Pricing, https://requester.mturk.com/pricing
(intermediation necessitated by the centralized marketplace for micro task work harms
both requesters and workers economically. To illustrate this point, Amazon charges
requesters a minimum 20% fee on any amount paid out to workers and an additional 5%
for requesting workers that have a good track record. Amazon charges an additional 20%
fee for tasks with 10 or more assignments, totaling upwards of 40% in fees. With over half
of MTurk workers earning less than $5 an hour.); Paul Hitlin, Research in the
Crowdsourcing Age, a Case Study: How Scholars, Companies and Workers are Using
Mechanical Turk, a ‘Gig Economy’ Platform, for Tasks Computers Can’t Handle, PEW
RESEARCH CENTER (July 11, 2016), http://www.pewinternet.org/2016/07/11/research-in-
the-crowdsourcing-age-a-case-study (Mechanical Turk pays its workers by the task
completed and not by the hour, therefore it is not required to follow federal wage laws.
The specific payments are determined by the requesters and not the site itself. This report
does not explore how Mechanical Turk sets prices or pays workers).
Ellen Cushing, Amazon Mechanical Turk: The Digital Sweatshop, UTNE (Jan/Feb 2013),
http://www.utne.com/science-and-technology/amazon-mechanical-turk-zm0z13jfzlin
(Amazon’s MTurk raises ethical concerns and some go as far as calling it a sweatshop of
online crowdsourced labor); Louise Matsakis, The Unknown, Poorly Paid Labor Force
Powering Academic Research, MOTHERBOARD (Feb. 4, 2016, 11:50 AM),
https://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/8q8ggb/the-unknown-poorly-paid-labor-force-
powering-academic-research; Vanessa Williamson, On the Ethics of Crowdsourced
Research, PS: POLITICAL SCIENCE & POLITICS, 49(1), 77-81,
https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/ps-political-science-and-politics/article/on-the-
ethics-of-crowdsourced-research/B1BDFB1111B416DD0B71540CD6E7D94F.
CROWDFLOWER, Plans, https://www.crowdflower.com/plans (CrowdFlower is currently
no longer sharing their pricing structure publicly but rather is requiring possible customers
to contact them for pricing directly).
23 Neeraj Kumar, Effective Use of Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk); Tips and techniques
for better usage of Amazon Mechanical Turk for researchers, NEERAJ KUMAR (May
2013, updated May 8, 2014), http://neerajkumar.org/writings/mturk/; Rory O’Reilly, How
the Gems Protocol Reduces Consensus by Redundancy, GEMS (Nov. 27, 2017),
https://blog.gems.org/how-the-gems-protocol-reduces-consensus-by-redundancy-
b151de80ecb8.
24 AMAZON, Mechanical Turk FAQ, https://requester.mturk.com/help/faq; Elena Simperl,
How to Use Crowdsourcing Effectively: Guidelines and Examples, 25 LIBER QUARTERLY
18 (2015), http://doi.org/10.18352/lq.9948.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

startups that hope to capture the enterprise market.25 Both options are
necessary in current centralized systems but also result in underutilization of
resources. Most importantly, the circa 38% of the labor pool that is unbanked
but skilled does not currently have access to the centralized micro task
marketplaces.26 Without a bank account, workers cannot contribute and
profit from the existing centralized micro task marketplace. Furthermore,
even for those in the labor pool who do have bank accounts, micro task work
is often associated with practical problems such as high fees of intermediary
financial institutions, lost or otherwise affected payments, lost checks,
among other issues.27 Finally, micro workers in centralized systems are faced
with invasive, privacy challenging, time consuming, and unclear signup and
approval processes that create market entry barriers for micro task workers.28
2 Decentralized Solutions for Mechanical Turk
Decentralized crypto market solutions for the existing mechanical turk
market can provide significant optimization while democratizing market
access. Semada is an autonomous, decentralized, open-source protocol29 that
enables domain specific reputation verification for human task
crowdsourcing, built on the ETHEREUM blockchain. The Semada Protocol,
25CROWDFLOWER, How Crowdflower Can Work For You,
https://www.crowdflower.com/use-cases/; Paul Hyman, Software Aims to Ensure Fairness
in Crowdsourcing Projects, 56 COMM. OF THE ACM 19 (Aug. 2013),
http://delivery.acm.org/10.1145/2500000/2492015/p19-
hyman.pdf?ip=140.209.181.61&id=2492015&acc=ACTIVE%20SERVICE&key=70F2FD
C0A279768C%2ECD0A7109D1C458E3%2E4D4702B0C3E38B35%2E4D4702B0C3E3
8B35&__acm__=1517263106_bffc0ea8d50db54f894b596fc073b9aa.
26 The Global Findex Database 2014 11 (World Bank Group, Policy Research Working
Paper 7255, 2014),
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/187761468179367706/pdf/WPS7255.pdf 22
(38% of the world’s population does not have a bank account).; Camilla Hodgson, The
World’s 2 Billion Unbanked, in 6 Charts, BUSINESS INSIDER (Aug. 30, 2017 2:00 AM),
http://www.businessinsider.com/the-worlds-unbanked-population-in-6-charts-2017-8;
Karen Weise, Why Half the World Doesn’t Have Bank Accounts, BLOOMBERG (Apr. 25,
2012 14:40 PM), https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2012-04-25/why-half-the-
world-doesnt-have-bank-accounts.
27 Miranda Katz, Amazon’s Turker Crowd Has Had Enough, WIRED (Aug. 23, 2017 6:55
AM), https://www.wired.com/story/amazons-turker-crowd-has-had-enough/;
Mark Harris, Amazon’s Mechanical Turk Workers Protest: ‘I am a human being, not an
algorithm’, THE GUARDIAN (Dec. 3, 2014, 9:41 AM),
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/03/amazon-mechanical-turk-workers-
protest-jeff-bezos; Kristy Milland, Crowd-working for Amazon took a Physical and
Psychological Toll for One Woman, THE BALTIMORE SUN (Aug. 23, 2017, 10:50 AM),
http://www.baltimoresun.com/news/opinion/oped/bs-ed-op-0824-amazon-tasks-20170823-
story.html; Hyman, supra.
28 Aniket Kittur et al., The Future of Crowd Work, 16th ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work 1301 (Feb. 2013),
http://hci.stanford.edu/publications/2013/CrowdWork/futureofcrowdwork-cscw2013.pdf.
29 www.semada.io
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

Semada Platform, and the modules built on top of the Semada Platform are
collectively known as the Semada Network.
The Semada Protocol facilitates producer (hereinafter known as workers or
miners) and consumer (hereinafter known as requesters) access to the
scalable power of micro tasks while eradicating the limitations of centralized
micro task systems.
The Semada reputation token enables the incentive alignment for users of
the Semada Protocol. The Semada reputation token is a multi-utility token
that is associated with and a value proposition for worker and requester
reputation on the Platform. The Semada Protocol uses its token mechanism
to incentivize and enforce the behavior of all micro task participants.
Through the reputation tokens, the Semada Protocol provides a micro task
worker reputation staking mechanism that incentivizes high quality work and
task completion by workers. The reputation staking mechanism via tokens
also allows requesters to verify and track worker quality, integrity, and
quantity. Moreover, the reputation staking mechanism only requires a
minimal fee from the requester while enabling micro task workers not only
to get paid for their work but also to capitalize on the quality and integrity of
their work.
The Semada Protocol can reduce the cost structure of intermediation-
requiring centralized structures for micro tasks in orders of magnitude.
Through its domain specific reputation verification for human task
crowdsourcing, the Semada Protocol removes the manual verification and
the associated multiplication of micro task work necessitated by centralized
systems, enabling its decentralized micro task workers to profit from the
disintermediation.
In addition to the improvement of existing centralized mechanical turk
solutions, existing decentralized solutions for micro task work are also
largely enhanced by the Semada Protocol. The Semada Protocol provides
coherent, attack resistant, and scalable solutions previously unprecedented
by existing decentralized solutions for micro task work. Like other
decentralized mechanical turk protocols, the Semada Protocol is designed to
disincentivize malicious actors and reward fair players. However, unlike its
decentralized competitors, the Semada Protocol ensures Sybil Attack and
Tyranny of the Majority attack resistance. The Semada Protocol architecture
and its incentive structure facilitates enhanced 51% attack resistance unlike
any previous reputation verification attempts in decentralized and
centralized networks. Moreover, unlike other decentralized mechanical turk
companies, the Semada Platform does not charge fees, other than the gas
needed, for the platform itself. Nevertheless, the Semada Platform
significantly reduces transaction fees for the parties.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

The Semada Platform provides a consumer friendly graphical user interface
(GUI). The Semada Platform GUI allows micro work requesters to avoid
building their own tools for micro work or hire startups. The Semada
Platform GUI provides a free consumer interface that connects micro task
requesters and workers, thereby freeing significant financial resources and
enabling unprecedented scalable solutions for micro tasks.
The Semada Platform expands the labor pool of micro task workers in orders
of magnitude and enhances the requester and worker experience and their
respective profitability. The Semada Platform GUI gives access to anyone
with an internet connection, including the unbanked. Thus, expanding the
micro task labor pool by up to 40%. The Semada Platform GUI enhances the
consumer experience by removing fees altogether, facilitating easy
cryptocurrency payment functionality, removing the necessity of check etc.
remittance that exist in centralized systems, and creating a quick and easy to
use signup process. Applying the Semada Protocol, the Semada Platform
removes socioeconomic barriers that exist in centralized mechanical turk
systems, including large fees, accountants, other intermediation.
In summary, the Semada Network addresses the following primary pain
points in existing centralized mechanical turk systems:
1. Disintermediation of centralized mechanical turk removes fee
structure
2. Crowdsourced tasks verification improves cost structure further
3. User interfaces enable requesters and workers alike
4. Blockchain technology increases micro task labor pool
5. Reputation tokens and scores optimally incentivize requesters and
workers alike
In addition to providing upgrades to existing centralized mechanical turk
system, the Semada Network also addresses the following primary pain
points in existing decentralized mechanical turk systems:
1. Attack resistant architecture
2. Scalable solution
3. No platform fees further reduce decentralized transaction fees
4. Gamification of micro tasks increases worker participation and
accuracy
Given the qualitative and quantitative improvements over existing
mechanical turk micro task platforms, the Semada Platform is uniquely
positioned to facilitate and expand the future growth of AI in a broad array
of industries. The Semada Platform supplies optimal micro task outputs that
satisfy the increasing demand for labelled data via micro task work at higher
quality while at the same time lowering cost for requesters and workers in
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

orders of magnitude. Through the quantitative and qualitative improvements
of mechanical turk micro tasks, the Semada Platform provides
unprecedented labelled training datasets that allow AI neural network
learning algorithms to reach unprecedented levels of automation after the
supervised learning process.
3 Semada Platform
The Semada Platform facilitates the efficient functioning of the micro task
community and its extension. Through the Semada Platform GUI, requesters
can engage in an easy and reliable deployment process for micro task
workers. Through reputation scoring and validating micro tasks, the Semada
Protocol enables workers to gain additional work and requesters to attract
high quality workers.
A key design goal of Semada is to create a minimal and robust architecture
that allows for creating much more complex and automated validation logic,
as well as machine expert validators. For instance, experts could evolve from
humans to smart contracts in order to allow for the automation of validation.
In addition, the forum can support the creation of formal verification proofs
and engines, which could be utilized by experts in their validation process.
Four components create the core functioning of the Semada expertise
validation platform:
1. A dynamic list of system-generated sub-tokens, representing worker
reputation pertaining to micro tasks performed.
2. The public forum of workers’ micro task performance. Worker
performance measures can be measured via a linked list of posts,
where each list has a sub-token assigned to it, based on its root post,
called the worker micro task reputation score.
3. The bench of workers. Workers are anonymous users who have the
option to stake their respective sub-tokens to answer validation
requests of other workers or proclaim their availability for off-
platform work.
4. The validation pool. Workers may stake their expertise-specific
tokens in order to validate or invalidate posts through a betting pool.
This is used to answer validation requests. The validation pool
intermediates between the bench and the forum to vest workers and
requesters with verified reputation. The validation pool is valuable as
it allocates power to influence the development of the expertise and
enables gaining future reputational salaries.
In summary, micro workers from the bench stake their expertise specific
reputation tokens to:
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

1. Announce their availability for micro work through public smart
contracts by posting stakes of their reputation.
2. Evaluate posts with upvotes or downvotes,
In summary, Semada Platform
1. answers requester queries about the list of available micro task
workers and each worker’s availability stakes
2. answers validation requests, taking as input an ETHEREUM fee and
the address of an ETHEREUM post, then
3. distributes the ETHEREUM as reputational salaries to the bench
4. opens a new validation pool
5. collects reputation stakes from workers on the pool
6. distributes the losers’ stakes to the winners
3.2 Reputation Staking Mechanism
Instead of repeating work on given tasks to attain high quality work products
for micro tasks, Semada uses an architecture of reputation verification that
examines micro worker task performance and verifies the validity and
quality of the work. The Semada reputation token staking mechanism,
created through ETHEREUM-based smart contracts, allows the micro task
constituents, e.g. requesters, workers, and verifiers to stake their reputation
tokens on the validity of their work and/or against the validity of others’
work.
The reputation token staking mechanism, provides well-calibrated incentives
for workers and requesters to perform micro tasks correctly. The It helps
maintain micro task quality and avoid micro task errors can be caused by
malicious actors and simple human error. Malicious actors may attempt to
get paid for micro task work they have actually not performed or not
performed at the expected level of quality. Semada staking mechanism
creates disincentives for malicious actors, enhancing the efficiency of the
Semada Network and making it attack resistant.
Requesters in the Semada Platform specify whether they require a worker
with a given reputation score or if they require verifiers for workers with
lower reputation scores, including the number of verifiers before the work is
deemed accurate. When staking their reputation tokens, workers assert that
their micro task work was performed accurately and at the expected level of
quality. Similarly, verifiers stake (a proportionally smaller) amount
of reputation tokens because verifiers have a higher reputation score and are
therefore less likely to be malicious actors.
3.3 Reputation Score
Every participant on the Semada Platform will have a reputation score linked
to their ETHEREUM address. The Semada reputation score functions as a
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

readily available indicator of how reliable a worker or requester is on the
Semada network. The micro task worker’s reputation score is a measure of
the worker’s history of completing micro tasks on the Semada network
qualitatively accurate, efficient, and consistently. The requester’s reputation
score is a measure of the requester’s history of interacting with micro task
workers on the Semada network including payment history for completed
work, among other measures. The Semada reputation score is formed and
linked to the respective network participant’s ETHEREUM wallet address.
Market factors balance the equilibrium of supply and demand of micro work
on the Semada Network based on the workers and requesters reputation
scores. If requesters have a lower reputation score, workers become less
likely to accept requesters’ offers. In turn, low reputation scores for micro
task workers result in a lower likelihood of retention for micro task work on
the Semada Network. Requesters can select workers based on their
reputation score, giving workers an incentive to keep the reputation scores
high by performing micro tasks with high accuracy and efficiency. The
reputation score mechanism and the building of reputation on the Semada
Platform allows workers to graduate to the privilege of being a verifier. The
reputation score mechanism helps discern malicious actors and simple
mistakes. It also protects workers and verifiers from fraudulent requesters
and suboptimally designed requests.
3.4 Payment System
The Semada Platform does not receive any fees. The Semada platform
is designed primarily to ensure security, and encourage maximal productive
cooperation, by valuing reputation over all else. A crucial element of
ensuring this security and cooperation consist of requiring users who want
validation to send all work fees to the platform to earn maximal reputation.
Choosing to enforce a protocol where all fees are shared with the expertise
creates a successful positive feedback loop: The more fees are sent to the
platform, the more the reputation is worth; which means the reputation
tokens will be more desirable to workers than one-time fees. This in turn
means the system will be carefully policed by vested constituents. This
makes the system more secure; so the platform will attract more public fees.
Unlike transactions on the Ethereum network that require gas uniformly, the
ETHEREUM network requires payment only for posters, not for viewers.
While some mechanical turk competitors on the Ethereum network are
required allow for micro payments and staking without using gas through
payment channels that unnecessarily complicate the operations, the Semada
Protocol uses the ETHEREUM blockchain architecture which significantly
simplifies the Semada Network’s operations on the blockchain.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

When starting a task, workers and verifiers send their stake via the Semada
Platform payment GUI. If and when worker’s micro tasks are verified and
approved through the voting pool in the Semada Network, worker reputation
earnings and stakes are released to workers and verifiers. To allow for cost-
efficient staking and micro payments to workers, the Semada payment
system allocates payments to its workers in as few transactions as possible.
Workers and verifiers can receive the balance owed by requesters at any
time. In turn, requesters can receive the balance of workers stakes they are
owed through the Semada Platform at any time.
The Semada payment system on the ETHEREUM blockchain has significant
advantages over the Ethereum payment systems via payment channels as
utilized by decentralized mechanical turk competitors. The Semada Payment
System will be used by requesters, workers, and verifiers to increase the cost
efficiency of the network. It allows for secure off chain payments without
using gas before transferring those payments on the ETHEREUM
blockchain at a later date.
3.5 Gamification of Micro Tasks
The foundational principle of proof of work in the blockchain suggests that
it is a lot easier to verify a game was played properly than it is to play it
properly. The Semada Platform incorporates this philosophy into its
gamification of micro task work through its user interface on the Semada
platform. On the Semada platform, the forum establishes the game and the
rewards, so the bench validators can verify the game was played properly
almost completely automatically.
Gamification is defined as the process of adding games or game-like
elements, such as a micro-task, to encourage active task worker participation,
boost motivation, and increase user loyalty. Game mechanics for micro task
work can be integrated via websites, apps, and services. Several examples
illustrate the use of gamification and its benefits. Gamified services include
language learning courses such as Duolingo and MindSpace.
Semada’s primary objective of embedding gamification into the user
interface is enhanced micro task worker incentives that enable faster
platform growth. Gamification of micro tasks is an iterative process that
incentivizes user game mastery. Users’ desire of game mastery combined
with their ability to earn a flexible income if and when they choose to create
well calibrated user incentives and significant platform loyalty. Semada’s
user interface for gamification of micro tasks makes monotonous work much
more enjoyable. Gamification facilitates the easiest and most enjoyable way
for users to earn reputation and gain financial benefits associated with their
enhanced reputation on the Semada Platform.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

Unlike other decentralized gamification attempts for micro task workers that
are monodimensional and only allow earning by playing the game, the
Semada platform offers players multiple opportunities to earn by playing.
Such multidimensional earning opportunities further optimize user
incentives and build unparallelled user loyalty through the proper incentive
structure.
4 Innovating the Mechanical Turk Market
Centralized freelance and mechanical turk markets are subject to significant
inefficiencies and misalignment of incentives for their workers. These
centralized platforms are intermediaries that make the global freelance
market expensive and inefficient. Centralized industry leaders in the
freelancer market, including Upwork, Amazon, and Fiverr charge up to 40%
in transaction fees.
Similarly, centralized mechanical turk marketplace leaders act as rent
seeking intermediaries that create numerous inefficiencies in the
market. Market leaders in centralized micro task marketplaces include
MTurk and Crowdflower. Just to illustrated, on MTurk, tasks can range from
clicking a link, going to a webpage and annotating an image, to completing
a survey. Crowdflower is particularly focused on enriching AI data.
Freelance workers are deprived of participating in the profits charged by the
centralized platforms.
By contrast, the Semada Platform not only allows increases of pay for
workers but workers can also capitalize on the quality of their work and the
associated reputation enhancement. Semada mechanical turk labor pool
enhancement through the participation of the unbanked, decreased cost for
requesters, and a user friendly quality management solution.
Unlike other decentralized mechanical turk platforms such as Gems, Bloom,
and Storm, the Semada Platform provides an attack resistant platform
ecosystem that grows in attack resistance as the platform grows. Unlike
GEMS, which bans malicious actors detected through the GEMS trust
mechanism from the platform, the Semada platform has a self-enforcement
mechanism. Once the system reaches maturity, the users will be guided by
the incentive system in the Semada architecture to avoid bad actors and
workers with lower reputation scores.
4.1 No Platform Fees
Unlike Centralized mechanical turk marketplaces, Semada does not charge
a centralized fee for micro transactions on the Semada platform. Centralized
mechanical turk marketplaces such as Crowdflower and MTurk charge
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

requesters for the right to submit tasks to their platforms. Such centralized
fees add downward pressure on the platforms’ worker compensation. By
contrast, the only cost on the Semada Platform is gas used on the
ETHEREUM blockchain for posters but not for viewers. The lack of fees
on the Semada platform creates a more efficient marketplace for workers,
verifiers, and requesters alike through the removal of the rent seeking
intermediators. This lack of any centralized fees enables workers, verifiers
and requesters to share the fees equally and increase the economic utility of
their cooperation via the Semada Platform.
4.2 Transaction Cost Removal
The Semada platform removes transactions costs associated with micro task
work. Unlike centralized mechanical turk platforms that require an existing
banking relationship to receive account transfers for otherwise unbanked
micro task workers, the Semada Platform operates entirely through crypto
transactions utilizing its reputation tokens and other cryptocurrencies. This
enables unbanked workers to avoid opening a bank account to receive
payments on centralized mechanical turk platforms, such as Crowdflower or
MTurk.
The Semada Platform also improves the payment system for micro task
workers in centralized mechanical turk platforms in orders of magnitude.
Centralized mechanical turk platforms are subject to significant payment
issues and payment timing for their workers. Workers are further burdened
by high fees for intermediaries that facilitate the payment process such as
Paypal. The fees make is only economically viable for higher volume
workers who can at some point avoid the Paypal fees but create barriers to
entry for new micro task workers.
The Semada Platform not only allows workers to get paid in Semada tokens
but also to capitalize on their growing reputation stakes within the platform.
The Semada Platform removes all non-Semada transaction fees for workers
as only requesters post ETH to request micro task completion. Holding and
storing Semada tokens does not necessitate a banking relationship. All that
is needed for a micro task worker to earn a living on the Semada Platform is
access to the Internet.
4.3 Optimized User Interface
Existing user interfaces for micro tasks require upgrades. In centralized
micro task platforms, user interfaces require high computer literacy.
Centralized mechanical turk interfaces are also outdate and create burdens
for the users. Requesters on centralized platforms are required to expense
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

significant resources to build the infrastructure for more complicated
projects. The lacking quality in mechanical turk user interfaces also
significantly increases the time for workers to perform tasks and increases
the error rate in performing tasks both of which significantly lower
worker earning ability on such platforms. Another burden is the centralized
use closed sourced software in mechanical turk that can only be limitedly
reused.
The Semada Platform interface for micro tasks can be built on top of the
Semada Platform and can provide a requester and worker friendly micro task
performance environment. The Semada team works directly for early
requesters to build reusable open source user interfaces modules on the
Semada Platform. All open source software components of modules are
reusable and enable future requesters to build new modules on existing ones,
enabling superior network effects within the Semada Platform. These
combined factors in the open source interface solution on the Semada
Platform enable requesters to obtain high quality performance on micro tasks
in less time and workers to earn more money in less time.
4.4 Worker Anonymity Increases Participation
Workers in the centralized micro task economy are required to pass an
approval process before they can start work. According to a study by the
World Bank, centralized approval processes and identity requirements for
mechanical turk worker registration creates significant limitations for the
registration of new workers for micro task platforms. However, centralized
micro task platforms need to verify identity to prevent malicious actors from
abusing the network and ensure work quality.
By contrast, on the Semada Platform, users do not need to verify their
identity to complete micro tasks. The Semada Protocol architecture, and
specifically its reputation token staking mechanism, make the Semada
Platform attack resistant. This mechanism enables the Semada Platform to
circumvent all the issues that are associated with centralized identity
verification processes. Accordingly, workers in the Semada Platform are not
required to expense money to qualify for centralized approval processes,
don’t experience delays, are not required to surrender their private
information. Given those benefits, the Semada Platform enhances the labor
pool of workers willing to provide micro tasks services.
The Semada Platform is built to facilitate such worker disclosures via posts
on the Forum. Alternatively, existing decentralized onboarding processes,
via Bloom and Ocular, among others, allow the verification of worker
identity information. The Semada Platform integrates such verified
identification information through post on the Forum in the user interface.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

6 Outlook
Mechanical turk is an application of the Semada Protocol and the Semada
Platform ecosystem. Other use cases will evolve on the Semada Platform
over time and applications for the Semada Protocol that cannot currently be
conceptualized will materialize. The Semada Platform architecture will
evolve in any setting that supports the ethical advancement of the crypto
evolution.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3128900

