SECURITIES VS. UTILITY TOKENS
SECURITIES VS. UTILITY TOKENS
Wulf A. Kaal*
Abstract
The nomenclature for the term “securities token” is unclear and the
term securities token has not been defined. The lack of a clearly
delineated nomenclature resulted in various uses and interpretations
of the term securities token, especially vis-à-vis the term “utility
token.” This article helps clarify the nomenclature by first defining
the general characteristics of securities tokens and the general
characteristics of utility tokens. Thereafter, the article delineates
key distinctions between the two categories.
Key Words: Securities Token, Utility Token, Blockchain, Startup,
Decentralized Commerce, Emerging Technology, Equity,
Distributed Ledger Technology, Blockchain Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O3
* Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis, USA).
The author is grateful to Josh Bykowski for excellent research assistance.
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 2
II. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SECURITIES TOKENS ........................... 4
III. GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF UTILITY TOKENS .......................................... 8
IV. DISTINCTION BETWEEN UTILITY TOKEN AND SECURITIES TOKEN ................... 11
V. CONCLUSION .......................................................................................... 14
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
I. Introduction
The lack of clearly defined technology features pertaining to
blockchain technology, distributed ledger, and other associated
terms has knock-on effects on other parts of the blockchain
ecosystem.
No truly uniform definition exists for blockchain technology. Some
refer to it as a giant worldwide, distributed, immutable “google
spreadsheet” for transactions.1 Others define blockchain by
focusing on its central elements, e.g., it is a transaction ledger,
electronic, decentralized, immutable, and provides cryptographic
verification, among several other elements.2
The core distinguishing features of blockchain technology help
define the technology generically but provide no specific
definitions. For example, the technology’s distributed consensus
model makes it much less likely that fraudulent transactions are
1 Craig Leppan, Who Is Blockchain Going to Affect the Most, OVATIONS (July
29, 2015), http://www.ovationsgroup.com/blockchain/; Jonathan Shieber, Colu
Aims to Bring Blockchain Technology Everywhere, TC (Jan. 27, 2015),
https://techcrunch.com/2015/01/27/colu-aims-to-bring-blockchain-technology-
everywhere/;
2 See, e.g., DELOITTE, BLOCKCHAIN ENIGMA. PARADOX. OPPORTUNITY 4–7
(2016),
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/Innovation/delo
itte-uk-blockchain-full-report.pdf. ALAN MORRISON, BLOCKCHAIN AND SMART
CONTRACT AUTOMATION: BLOCKCHAINS DEFINED, PWC (2016),
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology-forecast/2016/blockchain/pwc-smart-
contract-automation-definition.pdf; Alistair Dabbs, What Is Blockchain, and
Why Is It Growing in Popularity?, ARSTECHNICA (Nov. 6, 2016, 8:00 AM),
https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2016/11/what-is-blockchain/;
Lee Grant, Blockchain – Definition, Origin, and History, TECHBULLION (Sept.
6, 2016), http://www.techbullion.com/blockchain-definition-origin-history;
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

recorded as individual network nodes verify and validate chain
transactions before the execution of the transactions.3 The resulting
transparency and enhanced accountability are additional key
distinguishing features that help protect against fraud.4
Disintermediation is another key feature of the technology as the
technology incentivizes direct transactions between creators and
consumers.5 Other key features that are enabled by the technology
may include: more connectivity, more freedom of choice, fewer
hierarchies, more value and goal focused work, less focus on
ownership, less rent seeking behavior, fewer geographical
limitations, and less consumerism. These features enhance trust for
the users of the technology.6
As a result of the lacking clear nomenclature for blockchain
technology, many associated fields and parts of the ecosystem
3 See, e.g., Francois Janinotto, The Blockchain Explained to Web Developers,
Part 1: The Theory, MARMELAB BLOG (Apr. 28, 2016),
https://marmelab.com/blog/2016/04/28/blockchain-for-web-developers-the-
theory.html; Razvan Peteanu, Fraud Detection in the World of Bitcoin, BITCOIN
MAG. (Mar. 26, 2014, 5:50 AM EST),
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/fraud-detection-world-bitcoin-
1395827419/.
4 See, e.g., D’Aliessi, supra note 17.
5 Rene Bader & Thorsten Deckers, How Does Blockchain Work? Transactions
Without an Intermediary, ISBUZZNEWS (May 6, 2017),
http://www.informationsecuritybuzz.com/articles/blockchain-work-
transactions-without-intermediary/; Jill Richmond, How Blockchain Is
Transforming the Creative Industry, NASDAQ (Apr. 26, 2017, 8:25:46 PM EDT),
http://www.nasdaq.com/article/how-blockchain-is-transforming-the-creative-
industry-cm780005.
6 See, e.g., Brakeville & Perepa, supra note [__]. For an in-depth, nuanced
discussion of this point, see PETER VAN VALKENBURGH, OPEN MATTERS: WHY
PERMISSIONLESS BLOCKCHAINS ARE ESSENTIAL TO THE FUTURE OF THE
INTERNET 3–4, 23–26 (2016), https://coincenter.org/files/2016-
12/openmattersv1-1.pdf. .
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
experience similarly nebulous terms that often cause confusion
among market participants.
The lack of a clearly delineated nomenclature for the term
“securities token” resulted in various uses and interpretations of the
term securities token, especially vis-à-vis the term “utility token.”
This article helps clarify the nomenclature by first defining the
general characteristics of securities tokens and the general
characteristics of utility tokens. Thereafter, the article delineates
key distinctions between the two categories.
II. General Characteristics of Securities Tokens
The nomenclature for the term “securities token” is unclear and the
term securities token has not been defined. The lack of a clearly
delineated nomenclature resulted in various uses and interpretations
of the term securities token. Typically, commentators use the term
security token as a synonym for tokens that are treated as investment
contracts or stock in a blockchain company.7 Securities tokens
typically constitute an investment contract, where the primary
reason for the token purchase by investors, and main use case of the
token, is the anticipation of future profits in the form of price
7 Kenyon Briggs, Taming the Wild West: How the Sec Can Legitimize Initial
Coin Offerings ("Icos"), Protect Consumers from Bad Actors, and Encourage
Blockchain Development, 2 Bus. Entrepreneurship & Tax L. Rev. 424, 428
(2018).
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

appreciation, dividends or revenue share.8 While the lines between
the different types of tokens are blurred regularly,9 securities token
are typically investment contracts, whereas utility tokens typically
provide their users with access to a product or service.10 In other
words, securities tokens involve an underlying interest or function
of the token to replace actual financial securities, such as shares or
equity in legacy businesses.11
Key commonalities of securities tokens characteristics enable the
delineation of securities tokens from other token designs. A key
commonality of securities tokens includes its ability to derive their
value from an external tradeable asset.12 The underlying assets for
securities tokens can include corporations, earning streams, or
entitlements to interest payments or dividends.13 These underlying
assets of securities tokens are identical to the underlying assets of
equities, bonds, and derivatives. In other words, securities tokens
are very similar to shares in corporations, giving their owners
8 Taming the Wild West, p. 429.
9 Taming the Wild West, p. 428.
10 Securities Treatment of Tokenized Offerings Under U.S Law, p. 431.
11 Securities Treatment of Tokenized Offerings Under U.S Law, p. 432.
12 Carol Goforth, Securities Treatment of Tokenized Offerings Under U.S. Law,
46 Pepp. L. Rev. 405, 431 (2019).
13 Toshendra Kumar Sharma, Security Tokens vs. Utility Tokens: A Concise
Guide, Blockchain Council (Sep. 6, 2019), https://www.blockchain-
council.org/blockchain/security-tokens-vs-utility-tokens-a-concise-
guide/#:~:text=A%20security%20token%20is%20an,economy%20within%20th
e%20project%27s%20blockchain
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
ownership rights in an ecosystem or corporation.14 Key
commonalities in the literature on securities tokens include:
1. that a securities token functions as or is synonymous with
traditional security assets,15 and
2. that securities tokens are subject to traditional securities
regulation.16
The SEC has offered guidance on when a token becomes a security.
Under SEC guidance, investment contracts analysis helps determine
whether a digital asset has the characteristics of any product that
meets the definition of security under the federal securities laws.17
In Howey, 18 the U.S Supreme Court provides a framework for
investment contract analysis which can help determine if a digital
asset has any of the characteristics of typical securities.19 Although
the Howey test has four parts, the SEC notes that main issue in the
analysis of digital assets under the Howey test is whether a
14Janine Yorio, Security Tokens Are Back and This Time It’s Real, CoinDesk
(Aug. 24, 2021), https://www.coindesk.com/business/2021/06/30/security-
tokens-are-back-and-this-time-its-real/
15 Matt Hussey, Security Token vs Utility Tokens, what is the difference?, Decrypt
(Jan. 16, 2019), https://decrypt.co/resources/security-token-vs-utility-tokens
(“security tokens are tokens that are tradable. A security token can represent a
share in a company, a voting right in how the company operates, a unit of value,
or all three.”).
16 Rebecca Clinton-Floyed, Security Tokens VS Utility Tokens, Blockchain Expo
(May 30, 2019), https://www.blockchain-
expo.com/2019/05/blockchain/security-tokens-vs-utility-tokens/
17 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019),
https://www.sec.gov/corpfin/framework-investment-contract-analysis-digital-
assets
18 S.E.C. v. W.J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293, 298-99 (1946)
19 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

purchaser of such a token has a reasonable expectation of profits
derived from others.20 This issue is divided into two sub-elements:
1. Reliance on the efforts of others and,
2. Reasonable expectation of profits. In determining whether there
is reliance on the efforts of others the SEC focuses on two key
issues: - “[1] Does the purchaser reasonably expect to rely on the
efforts of an active participant? [2] Are those efforts the undeniably
significant ones, those essential managerial efforts which affect the
failure or success of the enterprise as opposed to efforts that are
more ministerial in nature?”21
Within their framework for analyzing digital assets, the SEC notes
many characteristics that would likely determine the purchaser of a
digital asset to be relying on the efforts of others. None of these
factors are necessarily determinative, but the stronger their presence
the more likely the element is met.22 In determining whether there
is a reasonable expectation of profits, profits can be, among other
things, participation in earnings resulting from the use of
purchasers’ funds or capital appreciation resulting from the
20 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
21 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
22 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
development of the initial investment or business enterprise.23 The
SEC also provides a list of characteristics that can determine if there
is a reasonable expectation of profit from the purchase of a digital
asset.24
III. General Characteristics of Utility Tokens
The term utility token is used to identify tokens that have an
intrinsic utility for a good or service. Utility tokens emphasize the
uses of the token and typically give their users access to a product
or service or give rewards to incentivize desirable behavior on the
respective platform.25 In order to interact with a given platform or
use case, users are incentivized to acquire access rights to the
product or service through the acquisition of the utility token.
Utility tokens may also take the form of a digital coupon that can be
redeemed in the future for discounted fees.
What makes a utility token unique is the utility its users derive
through the creation of a digital coupon26 or an app coin.27 For
example, one could compare utility tokens to chips in a casino.
Whereas chips in a casino do not convey ownership rights to a stake
23 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
24 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
25 Matt Hussey, Security Token vs Utility Tokens, what is the difference?, Decrypt
(Jan. 16, 2019).
26 Toshendra Kumar Sharma, Security Tokens vs. Utility Tokens: A Concise
Guide, Blockchain Council (Sep. 6, 2019).
27 Rebecca Clinton-Floyed, Security Tokens VS Utility Tokens, Blockchain Expo
(May 30, 2019).
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

in the casino or entitlement to a share of the casino’s winnings or
profits, chips can be used as a currency to purchase access rights to
play games, purchase services etc. within only that one casino that
issued the chips.28 Rather than replacing legacy financial services
like securities tokens, utility tokens are designed to provide users
with future access to a product or service that may or may not exist
at the time of the utility token issuance.29 Examples of recognized
utility tokens include Filecoin, Siacoin, Civic, among others.
Another consideration for the classification of utility tokens is their
investment status. Unlike securities tokens, many commentators do
not classify a utility token as an investment or investment contract.
Utility tokens are not investment contracts and are not investments
because are meant for a good or service30 and they are typically
exempted from federal securities laws if they are properly set up.31
Companies that issue utility tokens do not create them for
28 Janine Yorio, Security Tokens Are Back and This Time It’s Real, CoinDesk
(Aug. 24, 2021). Comparing an Uber token that could only be used to pay for
Uber rides - Token Classes Explained: Coin vs. Utility Token vs. Security Token,
Invao (Date unavailable; Accessed on Aug. 3, 2021), https://invao.org/token-
classes-explained-coin-vs-utility-token-vs-security-token/
29 Securities Treatment of Tokenized Offerings Under U.S Law, p. 429.
30 Rebecca Clinton-Floyed, Security Tokens VS Utility Tokens, Blockchain Expo
(May 30, 2019).
31 Toshendra Kumar Sharma, Security Tokens vs. Utility Tokens: A Concise
Guide, Blockchain Council (Sep. 6, 2019).
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
investment purposes.32 They are designed to be used for their
specific utility in a given context.33
From a regulatory perspective, merely calling a token a utility token
or structuring it to provide some utility does not prevent the token
from being characterized as a security.34 According to SEC
guidance, if a token is sold for use or consumption by purchasers it
may not be classified as a security for regulatory purposes. The SEC
provided a list of characteristics where, the stronger their
presence,35 the less likely a token is to be considered a security.
These characteristics include: 36
• The distributed ledger network and digital asset are fully
developed
• Holders of the digital asset are immediately able to use it for
its intended functionality, particularly where there are built-
in incentives to encourage such use
32 Phemex Contributing Writer, Security Token vs. Utility Token in Crypto: What
are The Differences?, Phemex (Aug. 5, 2021),
https://phemex.com/academy/crypto-security-token-vs-utility-token
33 Rebecca Clinton-Floyed, Security Tokens VS Utility Tokens, Blockchain Expo
(May 30, 2019).
34 Jay Clayton, Chairman, SEC, Statement on Cryptocurrencies and Initial Coin
Offerings (Dec. 11, 2017), (available at https://www.sec.gov/news/public-
statement/statement-clayton-2017-12-11).
35 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
36 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

• The digital assets’ creation and structure is designed and
implemented to meet the needs of its users, rather than to
feed speculation as to its value or development
• Prospects for appreciation in the value of the digital asset are
limited
• Any economic benefit that may be derived from appreciation
in the value of the digital asset is incidental to obtaining the
right to use it for its intended functionality.37
IV. Distinction between Utility Token and Securities
Token
Utility tokens can be distinguished from securities tokens based on
several core factors, including but not limited to the following: the
purpose of the token, associated valuation, associated rights, user
expectations, and regulatory status.38 The purpose of securities
tokens is typically to serve as investment contracts that represent
the legal ownership of a physical or digital asset. By contrast, the
purpose of utility tokens is typically to help create an internal
economy within a given project’s ecosystem, granting users access
37 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
38 Toshendra Kumar Sharma, Security Tokens vs. Utility Tokens: A Concise
Guide, Blockchain Council (Sep. 6, 2019). Rajarshi Mitra, Utility Tokens vs
Security Tokens: Learn the Difference – Ultimate Guide, Blockgeeks (May 13,
2020), https://blockgeeks.com/guides/utility-tokens-vs-security-tokens/
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
to services, voting, and governance rights within a specific project’s
ecosystem.39
As it relates to token valuation, utility token’s value often depends
on their functions, correlating value to actual demand for the utility
token. That is, a scaled-up project with a high number of users
usually result in increased utility token value. By contrast, the value
of securities tokens is often correlated to the value of the token
issuing company.40 In terms of rights that are associated with a
utility token versus rights that are associated with a securities token,
a securities token often gives a right or promises to deliver profit to
investors by the means of work or advertising performed
exclusively by a third party.
By contrast, a utility token typically gives its users rights to use a
service or product created by the utility token issuer.41 Users of
securities tokens typically expect that the value of the issuing
company is directly tied to the value of the securities token. By
contrast, users of utility tokens typically expect no relation between
the current valuation of the issuing company and the value of the
utility token.42 Furthermore, securities tokens users often expect to
39 Phemex Contributing Writer, Security Token vs. Utility Token in Crypto: What
are The Differences?, Phemex (Aug. 5, 2021).
40 Phemex Contributing Writer, Security Token vs. Utility Token in Crypto: What
are The Differences?, Phemex (Aug. 5, 2021).
41 Dany Chetverikov, Utility Tokens vs. Security Tokens: a Comprehensive
Guide, Nimera (Nov. 26, 2019), https://www.nimera.io/blog/utility-tokens-vs-
security-tokens
42 Toshendra Kumar Sharma, Security Tokens vs. Utility Tokens: A Concise
Guide, Blockchain Council (Sep. 6, 2019).
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

trade securities tokens with an expectation of directly associated
profit from the securities tokens. By contrast, users of utility tokens
typically trade utility tokens with an expectation to derive a utility
from the use of the token.43 The regulatory status for a securities
tokens is rather well established. By contrast, the regulatory status
for utility tokens is unclear.44
Utility tokens can also be distinguished from securities tokens
through the Howey test. While a token that passes the Howey test is
deemed a security token, a token that does not qualify under the
Howey test is often classified as a utility token.45 The SEC provides
an extensive list of characteristics that can be used to determine
whether a digital asset will meet the Howey test, i.e., whether it will
be considered a security token.46 The SEC also provides a list of
characteristics to determine if a digital asset does not meet the
Howey test, i.e., whether it will be considered a utility token.47
43 Martin Thomas, The 7 Types of Cryptocurrencies You Must Know,
gitconnected (Apr. 21, 2021), https://levelup.gitconnected.com/the-7-types-of-
cryptocurrencies-you-must-know-3b26b2ce0eb8
44 Toshendra Kumar Sharma, Security Tokens vs. Utility Tokens: A Concise
Guide, Blockchain Council (Sep. 6, 2019).
45 Rajarshi Mitra, Utility Tokens vs Security Tokens: Learn the Difference –
Ultimate Guide, Blockgeeks (May 13, 2020).
46 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
47 U.S Securities and Exchange Commission, Framework for “Investment
Contract” Analysis of Digital Assets, sec.gov (Apr. 3, 2019).
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
V. Conclusion
The digital asset industry will continue to refine the terms that apply
to its key projects and features. The term securities token is fairly
well defined in 2022 and any additional regulatory guidance will
continue to delineate its central features and distinguishing
characteristics. Utility tokens can be distinguished from securities
tokens. As the industry matures, the distinguishing features and
associated case law will likely increase and provide more guidance
to market participants.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4021599

