Decentralization – Past, Present, and Future
Decentralization -
Past, Present, and Future
Wulf A. Kaal**
Abstract
This introduction to decentralization examines decentralization’s
past, present, and future. By tracing the history of past and existing
decentralized systems and by examining emerging decentralized
technology solutions, the author highlights the trends that lead to
higher levels of decentralization in commerce and society.
Key Words: Decentralization, Disruptive Innovation, Emerging
Technology, Stable Cryptocurrencies, Illiquidity, Cost, Speculation,
Inflation, Price Stability, Transparency, Feedback Effects, Market
Stability, Stability Mechanisms, Monetary Policy, Crypto
Economics, Token Models, Incentive Design, Tokens, Initial Coin
Offerings, Blockchain, Distributed Ledger Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
** Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis, USA)
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

Introduction
This introduction to decentralization examines decentralization’s
past, present, and future. By tracing the history of past and existing
decentralized systems and by examining emerging decentralized
technology solutions, the author highlights the trends that lead to
higher levels of decentralization in commerce and society.
Part 1 – The Past: Examines how we got to where we currently are
with decentralization. The author provides an overview and concrete
examples of existing decentralization trends. The author examines
the different types of decentralization and shows how they are
interdependent. The author shows that the movement of
decentralization creates many unknowns. Yet, technology has
already decentralized many parts of society and empowered society
at an unprecedented scale. Take for instance the emergence of
smartphones and how they changed and enabled consumer behavior
around the globe, putting an unprecedented amount of information
and possible choices in the hands of individuals. Through
smartphones, information is increasingly available real-time and
comes unfiltered from the edge. This is just one example of a
remarkable transformations that one technology has spawned by
enabling consumers, and especially the unbanked. The open source
movement in combination with the fintech boom, powered by
artificial intelligence (AI), big data, and machine learning provide
other examples. For instance, AI enabled location-based marketing,
among many other innovations that are seemingly overnight
enabling tiny companies to compete with the leading worldwide
financial and other institutions.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

Part 2 – The Present: Examines the current state of decentralization
and identifies the opportunities, disruption, and challenges that are
associated with the increasing trend towards decentralization. To
contrast existing decentralization attempts, to explain the associated
opportunities and limitations, and to outline what is needed for truly
decentralized commerce solutions, the author examines Bitcoin and
its features as one existing example of an unevolved decentralized
culture. The underlying foundational infrastructure technology that
enabled Bitcoin is blockchain technology. Given the complexity of
the topics, the author uses analogies, storytelling and real-life
examples to elucidate the core limitations and associated
infrastructure needs for the evolving decentralized commerce. For
example, the way in which in the 1880s electricity was invented and
implemented as a foundational technology, including by way of
creating standards to instantiate, transfer, and sell electricity etc.,
gives many opportunities to draw analogies. Similarly, the invention
of the internet in the 1990s, the cyberpunk movement, the debate
over who the president of the internet may be, among other stories,
allow for the examination of real-life examples that underscore the
complexities and opportunities of decentralization attempts and
solutions. The author also examines the factors that allow people to
feel safe in a transaction at, for example, Starbucks in 2019 and
connect the identified factors back to what would work in
decentralized systems.
Part 3 – The Future: Addresses the future of decentralized systems
and examines the impact of increased levels of decentralization on
commerce and society. The author discusses some of the core
infrastructure elements that are needed before the first genuinely
decentralized transaction can materialize, including: 1. The legal
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

environment, 2. Underwriting in insurance, 3. A truly decentralized
blockchain that can overcome the blockchain trilemma
(decentralization, scaling, security), 4. Governance of blockchains,
e.g. evolutionary protocol upgrades that address the economic cost
of hardforks. After outlining the opportunities for commerce and
society that are associated with a truly decentralized technology
solution, the author examines the associated risks and ethical
challenges. The author provides an outlook on what seems possible
in the future of decentralization, based on existing models.
Part I: The Past
What is Decentralization?
No two minds will agree on a common definition or scope and scale
of decentralization. Most people still see decentralization from the
vantage point of centralized systems and hierarchical structures.
That is very much understandable. Out of necessity, humans have
engaged in centralized thinking since the emergence of tribal
societies and throughout urbanization and the industrial revolution.
To contrast centralized definitions of decentralization, here are some
examples that show what the evolving phenomenon of
decentralization is not:
· Terminologically, decentralization is not synonymous with
partnership, delegation, de-concentration, disassortative,
devolution, circulation
· Decentralization is not the addition of hierarchical levels in
a centralized organization
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

· Decentralization is not just the redistribution of centrally
organized authority or redistribution of centrally collected revenue
· Decentralization is not just the delegation of centralized
authority to managers on all levels of an organization
Decentralization is a worldwide phenomenon that permeates all
industrialized nations and affects most industries. The disruptive
effects of decentralization on centralized systems provide powerful
examples of the brave new realities that emerge through
decentralization. Here are some examples of decentralized systems
that have disrupted existing centralized commercial systems:
· Music Industry: Napster, Emule, Limewire, Pandora, Kazaa,
Pandora, Spotify
· Telecommunication: Skype
· Advertising: Craigslist
· Payments: PayPal
Several historical examples help illustrate the emergence and effect
of decentralized systems on parts of society. Take for instance:
· The attempted colonialization of the Apache tribe
· Alcoholics Anonymous
Decentralized commerce may generically be defined as the global
exchange of financial instruments, goods and services via emerging
decentralized technologies. Starting with various experiments in
electronic cash, such as DigiCash, among others, the emergence of
the Bitcoin protocol in 2009, the digital asset market is a market for
investment opportunities in virtual assets. Stock is not inherently
digital as it has strong ties to the real world. By contrast, Bitcoin is
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

a purely digital asset because it only exists in the virtual world.
Narrowly construed, digital assets are instantiated through computer
code and depend on so-called "consensus computer algorithms" to
trigger and validate a transaction in a given digital asset. Broadly
construed, digital assets can include video games in the broadest
sense and items sold in video games can be digital assets without a
consensus algorithm that validates the transaction or provides a level
of security.
Existing decentralized systems display several core commonalities
that affect commerce and society. For instance, decentralized
systems do not have a central intelligence or leadership system
based on traditional hierarchies. Instead, the intelligence is spread
throughout the system. Information and knowledge naturally filter
in at the edges of the system, closer to where the action is and where
most real-time information is created. Decentralized systems can
also very easily mutate and change because the information flow is
optimized through dynamic feedback effects. As a result, such
systems become more attack resistant on multiple levels. In turn, the
ability to mutate quickly allows the decentralized systems to grow
incredibly quickly. For example, for hundreds of years people
turned to experts to combat alcoholism and then AA became the
accepted prevailing way to dig oneself out of alcoholism within a
very short time period. Similarly, Skype offered free phone services
at minimal cost and forced the telecommunications industry to
reconsider its business models.
Types of Decentralization
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

Decentralized systems are constantly morphing and evolving with
new features. The resulting diversity of facets of decentralization
make categorization difficult. Yet, decentralization manifests itself
through several applications that affect each other. Such
applications can be categorized by core commonalities and
interoperative feedback effects. The resulting five general types of
decentralization are:
1. Governmental and Regulatory Decentralization
2. Technological Decentralization
3. Organizational Decentralization
4. Market Decentralization
5. Societal Decentralization
These five types of decentralization are each subject to iterative
decentralization processes and affect each other by way of feedback
effects. As one type proliferates, the other types are slowly but
increasingly affected, leading to changes that, in turn, affect each
other. The combined learning and feedback effects lead to the
creation of new markets while changing other markets and, over
time, create a slowly emerging new economy. The different forms
of decentralized commerce affect society at multiple levels as
different constituents begin to experiment with their own
applications and new solutions which in turn create feedback effects
for each of the four types of decentralization.
In the pre-and-post internet era, companies have used
decentralization of their organizational structures to their advantage
without significant new technological innovation. Take for instance
General Electric (GE) under Jack Welch. Before GE was run by Jack
Welch, it was a highly centralized institution with a highly
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

centralized bureaucracy that created significant inefficiencies and
depressed economic performance. Welch decentralized GE by
separating out GE business units that had previously been linked in
a conglomerate with associated reporting duties etc. Under Welch,
each new business unit maintained its own profit-and-loss statement
and were so independent that if Unit A wanted to buy a product from
Unit B, it had to pay the full market price. Segmenting the company
and creating distance and, in fact, competition between departments
and business units worked. Welch’s approach required each
business unit to become fully accountable and removed
inefficiencies. Welch’s method enabled each business unit to be run
efficiently and profitably, while allowing unit heads significant
flexibility and independence. GE’s market value skyrocketed as a
result of its decentralization of business units.
In politics, the increasing crises of legitimacy resulted in
democratically legitimized governmental decentralization.
Decentralization reforms of government are typically motivated by
public officials’ desire to handle responsibilities and decisions at the
regional or local level, not the national level. In democracies, it is
typically the role of conservative parties to advocate for a decrease
in the role of central government. Conservative parties have
proliferated and continue to proliferate in Europe and the United
States. The rightward shift in government illustrates society’s desire
to find solutions for new geopolitical problems, such as the
emergence of a new automated workforce that replaces existing and
traditional employment opportunities, the human migration from
Africa to Europe, the disillusionment of large parts of society with
existing political and social institutions, such as the European
Union, the Brexit movement, among many other political issues that
require solutions. Political decentralization can also be seen as
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

counterpoint to globalization and as an attempt to address the
perceived negative implications of globalization. Overall, the
emerging political and regulatory decentralization of society is a
public reaction to the increasing economic decline, demands of
minorities for a greater say in local governance, the general
weakening legitimacy of the public sector, government’s inability to
fund services, the overall decline in government services, and global
and international pressure on countries with inefficient,
undemocratic, overly centralized systems. The most lasting
consequence of the antiestablishment surge seems to be the erosion
of the old technocratic consensus about how to run an economy. The
disillusionment with existing political institutions’ ability to address
economic hardships that emerged in the aftermath of the financial
crisis of 2008-9 inaugurated a new form of technological
decentralization. As one result, among many, the Bitcoin protocol
emerged in 2009 as an attempt by its founders to provide an
alternative to the shortcomings of the financial system. Bitcoin and
its progeny spawned a slew of additional decentralized protocols
and decentralized technology attempts and solutions that, while
mostly still experimental, provide a gateway to future forms of
technological decentralization. The evolution of decentralized
protocols, ecosystems, and platforms, in turn, may provide
unprecedented democratic forms of organizing society and
coordinating human behavior.
Technological forms of decentralization started to become possible
in the aftermath of the invention of the internet. By creating online
communities and giving them the ability to communicate across
borders in real-time, the internet created new forms of
communication, e-commerce, and knowledge exchange on the edge.
The initial pioneers of internet technology saw it as a fully
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

decentralized network that could not be controlled by any one
person or entity. This initial vision of the internet resulted in the
cyberpunk movement when it became increasingly apparent that
consumer preferences would require increasing political
compromises in the internet architecture.
Technological forms of decentralization via the internet, in turn,
enabled new hybrid forms of organization. Take for instance
companies like eBay and Amazon as examples of centralized
companies that decentralized the customer experience. These
companies combined the best of both worlds. The used the structure,
control and associated profit optimization of centralized entities and
combined it with the bottom-up approach of decentralization in the
form of customer reviews. This combination brought significant
success to eBay but also created tensions. While people are willing
to trust others by way of user ratings, they also require safeguards
for consumers that typically require command-and-control
centralized structures. EBay’s use of network effects and network
growth made it increasingly useful and increased the likelihood that
customers would stay with the network. While the user ratings eBay
uses clearly have flaws (that illustrate the need for a decentralized
reputation verification system – discussed in Chapter 6), so far,
nobody has been able to come up with a better technology. EBays
decentralized user ratings proved to be its biggest competitive
advantage. Like eBay, Amazon is a hybrid organization in the sense
that it has a centralized hierarchical control structure combined with
a powerful set of decentralization features. Amazon also tapped into
peoples’ generosity and desire for community by channeling it in to
a decentralized network of reviewers in a reviewer system.
The evolving technological decentralization, in turn, has created
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

new markets and continues to change existing markets. For instance,
with the emergence of the Bitcoin protocol in 2009, the digital asset
market began to evolve. Until the creation of the first known alt-coin
(e.g. an alternative coin to Bitcoin) around April 15, 2011, Bitcoin
virtually dominated the market and was in fact the only digital asset.
Between 2017 and 2019, the alt-coin market proliferated
significantly. Correspondingly, from 2016 to 2017, Bitcoin’s market
share dropped dramatically. At the end of 2014, with the
instantiation of smart contracting in the Ethereum ecosystem and the
ETH currency, the market for digital assets started to diversify and
proliferate substantially. New alt-coins emerged almost weekly,
leading to over 2000 crytocurrencies in circulation in late 2018.
Such new cryptocurrencies created a new market for initial coin
offerings (ICOs). The ICO market peaked from March 2018 to June
2018. The percentage of ICOs in relation to total fundraising of
blockchain startups dropped from 80% to around 35% in August
2018 and only marginally recovered between September 2018 and
February 2019 at around 40% to 50% before dropping to 20% in
March 2019. From March 2017 to June 2018, ICOs were the
overwhelmingly dominant fundraising tool for the blockchain
industry. The demise of the ICO market turned the overall trend
away from ICO funding to venture funding in the blockchain
industry.
The emergence of the ICO market changed the market for venture
funding. In the existing venture capital model, venture capital funds
invest significant amounts of money in the hope of finding the next
unicorn start-up. This investment process is subject to long,
complex, and time intensive processes leading up to a late liquidity
event in the form of an IPO or acquisition. By contrast, ICOs provide
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

liquidity to investors much faster and allow venture capital funds to
capitalize on existing profits early. Venture capital funds who
invested in crypto start-ups gain access to much earlier liquidity via
ICOs by converting their cryptocurrency profits into Bitcoin or
Ether through any of the cryptocurrency exchanges and can
thereafter transfer into fiat currencies via online services such as
Coinsbank or Coinbase. During the ICO boom years, the venture
capital market in the decentralized technology sector ground to a
halt. In the aftermath of the ICO boom and collapse, venture
funding has become, again, the predominant model for funding
blockchain startups.
The altcoin market also created opportunities for new organizational
design. With the emergence of Ethereum, the leading altcoin, and its
smart contracting, a host of decentralized technology projects
materialized. Several of such projects attempt to change
organization design at a fundamental level. While it is still difficult
to imagine a world without governance structures facilitated by
agency constructs, Decentralized Autonomous Organizations
(DAOs) have started to challenge the core believe that governance
necessitates agency.
The first DAO, launched in May 2016 and instantiated on the
Ethereum network (an altcoin), is the founders’ attempt to set up a
corporate-type organization without using a conventional corporate
structure. The first DAO had a governance structure that was
entirely built on software, code, and smart contracts that ran on the
public decentralized blockchain platform Ethereum. Because if was
pure computer code it had no physical address, no jurisdiction that
could claim jurisdiction/control over it, and it was not an
organization with a traditional hierarchy as we know it from
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

traditional corporate structures. The DAO did not use a traditional
corporate structure that necessitated formal authority and
empowerment flowing top down from investors/shareholders
through a board of directors to management and eventually staff.
Indeed, it had no directors, managers or employees. In essence, all
the core control mechanisms typically employed by principals in
agency relationships were entirely removed in the DAO. The first
DAO was, in effect, a decentralized venture capital fund that
allowed all of its 1800 members to vote on venture capital
investments in technology startups.
In light of increasing technological and organizational
decentralization, regulatory decentralization has become a reality in
many jurisdictions. For instance, in April 2016, the Financial
Conduct Authority (“FCA”), the financial regulatory body in the
United Kingdom, broke new ground by announcing the introduction
of a “regulatory sandbox,” which allows both startups and
established companies to roll out and test new ideas, products, and
business models in the area of Fintech (i.e., new technologies aimed
at making financial services, ranging from online lending to digital
currencies, more efficient). The idea behind the sandbox is to
provide a safe space for testing innovative and increasingly
decentralized products and services without being forced to comply
with the applicable set of rules and regulations. With the sandbox,
the regulator aims to foster innovation by lowering regulatory
barriers and costs for testing disruptive innovative technologies,
while ensuring that consumers will not be negatively affected. What
makes the regulatory sandbox so attractive is that, insofar as
technology has consequences that flow into everyday lives, such
technology will be open to discussion and democratic supervision
and control. In this way, public entitlement to participate in
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

regulatory debates can help to create a renewed sense of legitimacy
that justifies the regulation. Given these benefits, other regulatory
sandboxes have been introduced by other regulators, such as the
Australian Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC),
Singapore’s Monetary Authority (MAS) and Abu Dhabi’s Financial
Services Regulatory Authority (FSRA).
Many other examples exist that illustrate the feedback and knock-
on effects between decentralized technology, organizational
decentralization, regulatory decentralization, and decentralization
(and disruption) of markets. Many other feedback effects are
constantly emerging and affect other parts of society. For instance,
higher education has started to pick up on the decentralized
technological opportunities for commerce. Institutions of higher
learning have started to create basic courses on blockchain
technology and coded distributed ledger technology solutions
starting in 2018.
It is important to note that the decentralization movement is still in
a nascent state in many industries. For instance, inside of
corporations, smart contracts play no or only a negligible role.
Similarly, in world economies, cybercurrencies only play a small
role and still have a long way to go. Despite these existing
underdevelopments, the decentralization phenomenon has been
ongoing and has become a significant movement.
How We Got This Far
Disruptive innovation in the internet age creates an environment that
enables ever increasing decentralization. Disruptive innovation is
characterized by scientific discoveries that change the existing
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

technological product paradigms and provide the foundation for
more competitive new technologies and products to emerge. By
enabling discontinuous innovations of processes, products, and
services, disruptive technological innovations facilitate exponential
improvements in the value proposition for customers. Disruptive
technological innovation can be characterized by the emergence of
completely new technologies, the new combination and application
of existing technologies, and the application of new technologies to
specific societal problem areas, each precipitating a significant
paradigm shift for product technology or creating entirely new
paradigms. Disruptive innovation exemplifies Schumpeter’s
“Creative Destruction,” that is, the creation of competitive strength
through innovation that is followed by new demand in new markets
while destroying older and less competitive technologies and
existing markets that are based on older and less competitive
technologies.
The literature on management has addressed the implications of
disruptive technologies and innovation since the mid-1990s. The
literature warned businesses that disrupter startups would attract
new lower-end consumers by offering inexpensive substitutes for
products and would then gradually move upmarket by attracting
higher-end consumers, suggesting that businesses act quickly when
disrupters appear and either acquire the disrupter or incubate a
competing business that embraces the disruptive technology. A
market leader’s lack of investment in disruptive technologies often
results in the abrupt loss of market dominance and often even total
replacement in such markets. Market leaders often shortsightedly
refuse to cannibalize their market dominance through the use of
disruptive technologies. This enables small entrepreneurial firms with
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

no established customer base to take advantage of disruptive tech-
nologies and redefine such markets. Market leaders, successful
institutions, and managers fail when they do not distinguish
sustaining technologies from disruptive technologies.
Successful disruptive products of the last fifteen years displayed
shared core characteristics that were facilitated by growth and
advancement in core disruptive technologies. Revolutionizing
products in the past few decades that were based on disruptive
technological innovation were typically smaller in size, lighter,
cheaper, more convenient and flexible, more reliable, had better unit
performance with higher efficiency, and were more user friendly
than prior products. These characteristics typically require
significant advances and growth in artificial intelligence and
technologies including micro- or nanotechnologies, as well as
materials and component technologies. A simple example is the
disruption that came with the invention of the smart phone, which
allows people around the world to access information
instantaneously at an unprecedented scale.
Disruptive innovation via so-called big-bang disruptions differs
from more traditional innovation. Big-bang disruptors not only often
offer a much cheaper product in comparison with the established
products, but they are also better integrated with other products and
services and are often more inventive. In today’s age of social
media, big-bang disruptors can successfully exploit consumers’
advanced access to product information and consumers’ ability to
contribute to products and share such contributions and product
improvements via social media and other outlets. Internet fads and
products can be accessible to consumers in the entire world within a
matter of days. Big-bang disrupters typically launch businesses
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

without a foundation, using cloud computing, open platforms built
on the internet, and fast-cycling mobile devices. Big-bang disrupters
often produce multiple new products to identify which products may
take hold in the market. While most such products fail, the payoff
associated with the unconstrained growth of those products that
succeed is substantial and facilitates and often accelerates other
forms of disruptive innovation.
The telecommunications market and in particular the evolution of
smart phones has revolutionized many markets and entire industries.
Smartphones have revolutionized society in less than a decade.
With more than 1 billion users worldwide and 2.5 million ever
increasing apps available across Google and Apple’s digital
marketplaces, Smartphone’s role in shaping human interaction in
the 21st century has been as dramatic as it is far-reaching. With the
launch of the iPhone in 2007, smartphone adoption rates quickly
exceeded other technological milestones such as the TV, the
personal computer, the telephone, and the light bulb. The
smartphone outpaced the TV as the consumer technology with the
fastest adoption rate, reaching 40 percent market saturation in just 2
1/2 years. Over sixty percent of internet traffic today comes from
mobile devices rather than desktops, which long served as the
dominant online portal. Increasing evidence exists that smartphone-
enabled search engines and digitally managed contact lists are
affecting how the human brain processes information. Internet-
connected devices have already become a kind of external memory
source for many people. The role of smartphones for societal change
can also not be underestimated. Take for instance, when the Arab
Spring began rippling through the Middle East in early 2011.
Demonstrators and journalists alike used smartphones to gather
information quickly and disseminate it. The smartphone quickly
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

proved to be a powerful tool for social change. For the unbanked,
who lack access to traditional bank accounts but who nonetheless
have high rates of mobile phone ownership, the smartphone and
mobile money are playing a critical role in financial inclusion. For
the unbanked the smartphone provides access to stored value
accounts and a growing set of financial services that can change their
life.
Big data generated by mobile devices is also a significant driver of
disruptive innovation. The idea of N=All, e.g. being able to access
and evaluate the entire dataset rather than a small sample thereof,
facilitated by big data, allows researchers to understand correlations
that are completely unprecedented and to revolutionize our world.
Big data in the form of digitized data that grows at exponential rates
and can be captured and manipulated electronically draws on several
core sources including the internet of things, public records, social
media, and cameras, as well as satellite tracking. Big data benefits
not only industry and researchers, but it also increases consumer
choice through publicly available websites providing big data
analyses intended to support consumers’ decision-making
processes.
Despite the overwhelming benefits associated with big data, big
data’s use of such disparate sources creates challenges for the
integration of data and normalization. The literature mostly takes
issue with the big data inaccuracies that occur when collecting data
from databases that merely require generalized accuracy. Big data is
often not the output of instruments designed to generate valid and
reliable data suitable for scientific analysis. Foundational data issues
of construct validity, measurement, reliability, and data
dependencies are the same regardless of data quantities. Some
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

critique the implicit assumption of big data researchers that big data
is a substitute for traditional data collection and analysis rather than
a mere supplement, while others see big data and small data not as
mutually exclusive but as reinforcing and supporting each other. Big
data shortcomings can largely be addressed with artificial
intelligence (AI), and the combination of big data and AI opens up
significant additional big data applications.
AI presents another significant field of disruptive innovation. AI is
different from a regular computer algorithm. It tries to emulate
human thought processes and rational human behavior through self-
learning and storage of experiences. Because it emulates human
behavior, AI can act differently in the same situations, depending on
the actions previously performed. Many sectors of the economy are
already significantly affected by the rapid advances in AI during the
past decade. The exponential development of AI and the associated
disruptive innovation pose substantial challenges for policy makers
in education, financial markets, labor markets, and other areas.
Several examples help illustrate the power of disruptive innovation
and its consequences. Corporate history is littered with numerous
examples of successful companies that drifted into obscurity after
failing to embrace change. Nokia, Kodak, and Blackberry are
prominent examples. All these firms collapsed after fast changes in
their respective markets rendered their products/services irrelevant.
Several core common denominators are often associated with
companies that are less successful in a business environment of
disruptive innovation. Less successful companies are also often
slow in embracing algorithmic technologies, data analytics, big data,
and platforms. Instead, such companies usually prefer to concentrate
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

on the execution of established business models built around
existing and successful products or services. Executives with a
knowledge of, and focus on, innovation and consumer experience
— i.e., those individuals responsible for the initial success of a
company and best placed to deliver relevancy — often find
themselves marginalized from core decision-making processes in
companies that focus on established products. Less successful
companies often share a myopic and short-term focus on
shareholder value maximization that has led to an unhealthy
emphasis on firm share price, market valuations, and financial
metrics that obscure issues of relevancy. Listed companies, in
particular, are prone to put too much emphasis on financial metrics,
such as return on net assets, return on capital deployed, and internal
rate of return. Of course, it is important to focus on financial metrics.
However, it is also important to realize that an emphasis on
measures that aim at quarterly earnings and short-term stock price
performance can easily distract an organization from the important
business task of identifying strategies that can help a firm remain
relevant in the future.
A prominent example of a company that was successful under the
old and established metrics but that did not meet consumer demands
is Microsoft under Steve Ballmer. Microsoft was enormously
profitable, even though it started to lose relevancy with consumers
after Ballmer took over from founder Bill Gates as CEO in 2000.
Ballmer oversaw a tripling of sales from 2000 to 2015, and that he
doubled profits and created a tremendous number of jobs. Ballmer
acquired Skype and launched Xbox. By any of the traditional metrics,
Steve Ballmer is considered a success.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

Ballmer was not successful when considering the purpose of a
company in terms of maintaining relevancy and offering meaningful
consumer experiences. Ballmer failed to understand the most
important technological developments that were taking place during
his tenure as CEO. While a new world of networked technologies
and mobile consumption arrived, Microsoft under Ballmer failed to
adapt quickly enough, and as a result Microsoft ceased to be
relevant. Microsoft missed these developments because it focused
on short-term financial metrics, rather than on designing products
relevant for the next generation of consumers. Instead, Ballmer let
younger firms and startups move in and reap the benefits. Microsoft
was able to survive by re-inventing itself. After new CEO Satya
Nadella took over, Microsoft changed direction, focusing on
commercial cloud services (Azure), cognitive services (speech
recognition artificial intelligence), and premium subscription and
content services for Windows 10. From a relevancy perspective, this
new strategic direction looks smart, even if Microsoft is unlikely to
re-capture its dominance of the 1980s or 90s.
The disruptive change coming from technological innovation is
often directly linked to the emergence of financial technology
(fintech). Fintech — the intersection of finance and technology—
has revolutionized the traditional landscape of many financial
products and services and changed the lives of business owners. The
merging of financial services and technology is one of the fastest
growing markets in recent years. FinTech is not only improving
financial services but also spurring economic growth and
development in many parts of the world. The introduction of
technology into the once obsolete financial system meant that
service providers are now taking heed of customers’ needs. The
innovation of financial services via technology has created systems
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

that are faster, cheaper and more convenient for the consumer. As a
result, customers turn away from the legacy institutions that once
dominated financial services. To counteract this trend, established
banks and financial services providers are now turning to
technology companies to innovate and improve their products and
services. Take for example the recent announcement by Goldman
Sachs and Apple regarding their joint effort to introduce a Apple
Credit card. This move is significant because it shows that Goldman
Sachs is finally realizing that the future of banking is with the
consumer market, a market it mostly ignored thus far. Fintech
epitomizes the core principles of decentralization. Fintech brings
information closer to the edge and serves the consumers, it disrupts
centralized structures in finance and forces the disrupted financial
conglomerates to serve the consumer better.
Like fintech, the merger of the regulatory and legal markets with
technology (RegLegalTech) is changing the legal and regulatory
landscape and decentralizes the application of regulation in many
industries. The RegLegalTech sector has evolved from support
systems to fully integrated and automated services that increasingly
disrupt diverse sets of industries. RegLegalTech can generally be
defined as information technology services and software, as well as
platforms and their applications. Since the 1970s, with the invention
of the first legal databases, RegLegalTech has supported existing
ways of operating and practicing law. In fact, RegLegalTech created
the need for additional lawyers to evaluate the new legal materials
that are made more quickly available and more easily accessible by
technology. At first, RegLegalTech made law firms and lawyers
more efficient in performing their activities. Examples include
automated billing, document storage, practice management, and
accounting software. In the early 2010s, RegLegalTech became
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

more advanced and started to include technology that assisted legal
professionals in due diligence and e-discovery processes. Since
2015, RegLegalTech has continued to evolve in unprecedented
ways. Multiple startup companies and their investors have started
to capitalize on technologies, and their applications are already
replacing some junior lawyers and disrupting the existing
parameters for the practice of law.
Four categories of startups in RegLegalTech can be distinguished.
The first category includes startup companies that offer a range of
online legal services, removing the in-person legal consultation
process and guidance process for clients. The second RegLegalTech
startup category involves online “matching” platforms that connect
lawyers with clients. Such platform startups help consumers find a
fitting lawyer without the costly involvement of a law firm. The
third category entails startups that use AI tools to take over their
lawyer clients’ time-consuming and expensive legal research
activities such as reviewing, understanding, evaluating, and
reapplying contracts. Finally, startups with expertise in blockchain
technology attempt to replace lawyers as intermediaries in certain
types of transactions.
The decentralization that is a central part of the RegLegalTech
startup companies’ purpose and that disrupts existing practices has
broad repercussions for the legal and other professions. First,
existing legal and intermediary services are either rendered
increasingly irrelevant or replaced by RegLegalTech. Junior
professionals and support staff are likely the first victims of the
RegLegalTech evolution. RegLegalTech applications will be able to
perform most of a junior lawyer’s work in the near future without
the human elements that create imprecision, flaws, inaccuracies,
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

possible lawsuits, and delay. Second, and most importantly, the
legal profession will be forced by such startup companies to
innovate, a task that is not easily accomplished by overextended,
and often cumbersome, legal organizations that have lost the
capacity for agile reinvention.
Part 2: The Present
The Brave New World of Decentralization
Emerging technology enables the evolution of decentralization. A
review of blockchain technology provides the earliest possible
insights into how decentralized technology solutions may continue
to shape and transform commerce and society. The emergence and
proliferation of distributed applications (DApps) in the aftermath of
the invention of the Bitcoin protocol in 2009 demonstrate that a
nascent market for such applications and consumer demand already
exists. Consumer preferences will continue to shape the DApps
market and the solutions it may offer for commerce and society.
Blockchain technology creates a platform for trust through truth and
transparency for parties. Because the blockchain (at the least the
public blockchain) is in fact public and immutable, the technology
increases transparency, while at the same time significantly
reducing transaction costs. Blockchain technology provides formal
guarantees to participating parties. Because of the blockchain
guarantees, the technology allows a qualitatively different solution
for agency, a foundational element of capitalism. The immutability
of the blockchain and its cryptographic security systems provide
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

transactional guarantees and create trust between parties. Such
guarantees ensure no participant can circumvent the rules embedded
in blockchain code. Blockchain guarantees include contract
execution only if and when all contract parameters were fulfilled by
both parties and verified by a majority of miners/nodes in the
system. Hence, in the blockchain infrastructure, there is no need for
the principal to institute oversight and monitoring with the
associated agency costs. Because of the governance guarantees
embedded in code, blockchain addresses the inherent agency
problems in modern finance and corporate governance
comprehensively.
Blockchain technology secures the integrity of contractual
relationships by removing fraudulent transactions. Compared with
existing methods of verifying and validating transactions by third
party intermediaries (banking, lending, clearing etc.), blockchain’s
security measures make blockchain validation technologies more
transparent, faster, and less prone to error and corruption. While
blockchain’s use of digital signatures helps establish the identity and
authenticity of the parties involved in the transaction, it is the
completely decentralized network connectivity via the internet that
allows the most protection against fraud. Network connectivity
allows multiple copies of the blockchain to be available to all
participants across the distributed network. The decentralized fully
distributed nature of the blockchain makes it practically near
impossible to reverse, alter, or erase information in the blockchain.
Blockchains’ distributed consensus model, e.g. the network “nodes”
verify and validate chain transactions before transaction execution,
makes it extremely rare for a fraudulent transaction to be recorded
in the blockchain. Blockchain’s distributed consensus model allows
node verification of transactions without comprising the privacy of
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

the parties. Blockchain transactions are therefore arguably safer than
a traditional transaction model that requires third-party intermediary
validation of transactions. Blockchain technology is also
substantively faster than traditional third-party intermediary
validation of transactions.
Cryptographic hashes used in blockchain technology further
increase blockchain security and removes trust barriers in
commercial relationships. Cryptographic hashes are complex
algorithms that use details of the existing entirety of transactions of
the existing blockchain before the next block is added to generate a
unique hash value. That hash value ensures the authenticity of each
transaction before it is added to the block. The smallest change to
the blockchain, even a single digit/value, results in a different hash
value. A different hash value in turn makes any form of
manipulation immediately detectable. As such, hash cryptology
provides another level of guarantee in commercial relationships
executed through blockchain technology.
In summary, blockchain technology creates an independent and
transparent platform for establishing truth and building trust.
Intermediaries, bureaucracy and old-fashioned procedures are
replaced by: code, connectivity, crowd, and collaboration. The
technology increases openness and speed, while at the same time
significantly reducing costs. But perhaps the most significant feature
of blockchain is that it is so adaptable. There are multiple possible
applications relevant in a business context.
Technology-enabled decentralized commerce is subject to far fewer
and rather different transaction costs compared with centralized
legacy businesses in the same industries. The decentralized
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

emerging technologies used in decentralized commerce can increase
the overall trust of consumers and market participants at an
unprecedented scale. Trust can help lower transaction costs, but it
also increases consumer and overall market confidence and
certainty, which facilitate economies of scale that may not be
possible in centralized structures. Moreover, because of their lower
cost structure, decentralized platforms have the ability to remove
consumer fees that are an integral part of their centralized
competitor businesses. Removing such centralized fees also allows
for the eradication of downward pressure on the platforms’ worker
compensation because costs are less likely to increase and be passed
on to workers and consumers. The lack of fees can help create a
more efficient marketplace through the removal of the rent seeking
intermediators.
Blockchain technology has vast disruptive, innovative properties.
Despite the very early-stage development of blockchain technology,
the possible applications are significant. Consider the blockchain-
based currency, Bitcoin. Until recently, most commentators viewed
Bitcoin as a hype—susceptible to fraud, price manipulation, and
corruption. But today, the issue is no longer whether cryptocurrency
will survive, but rather how it will evolve. The high levels of
investor activity in the blockchain area appear to provide a reliable
indicator of the commercial maturity of blockchain technology.
Venture capital (VC) investment in startup companies that utilize
blockchain technology has increased exponentially since 2012 but
diminished during the crypto winter. Investor interest in the
technology will likely further increase as new applications and uses
materialize. Particularly, the applicability of blockchain-based
smart contracts to digital marketplaces, the sharing economy, the
IoT, and AI will further accelerate its development.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

Take for example, business, administrative, and legal processes that
rely on intermediaries. Any such processes may become redundant
because of advances in, acceptance and implementation of
blockchain technology. Corporate processes that have ledger
functionality but rely on legal intermediaries could be streamlined
very quickly by implementing blockchain technology. When
blockchain technology becomes more widely accepted and
applications spread into consumer territory, existing processes and
structures will likely be among the first processes to become
redundant. For instance, forms of keeping legal ledgers—such as
notary and registry services, motion practice in court, and legal title
searches, among several others—may be among the first services to
disappear in the not-too-distant future.
The combination of blockchain technology startups with platforms,
AI, and machine learning offer opportunities for developing new
technologies. Leveraging the big data that is collected by using tech
solutions and blockchain applications in combination with machine
learning creates more creative and faster tools. This, in turn, creates
a surge of new and innovative platforms with disruptive effects for
many industries.
Decentralized payment systems’ ability to rely entirely on
cryptocurrencies creates comparative advantages in orders of
magnitude over centralized systems. Centralized fiat payment
systems and platforms typically require some form of an existing
banking relationship in order for consumers to utilize their services.
Holding and storing cryptocurrencies does not require a banking
relationship. Centralized fiat payment systems are subject to
payment processing issues and slow processing times for payments.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

They also require high fees for intermediaries that facilitate the
payment process such as banks and PayPal, among others. The fees
make it only economically viable for higher volumes of transactions,
creating barriers to entry in the process. Decentralized payment
systems are not subject to these limitations. Finally, while money
laundering has traditionally been a problem in these markets,
anonymity of market participants in cryptocurrency networks can
also increase participation in certain markets and economies. As the
technology and its uses evolve, traditional markets are increasingly
encapsulated by it.
A growing body of evidence suggests that stable cryptocurrencies
may play a role in the world economy. In 2018, the IMF estimated
that 11 countries are at 20% or higher inflation. Using black market
exchange rates measured weekly, the Cato Institute’s Troubled
Currencies Project estimates that the real rates are significantly
higher than the IMF estimates. Currency devaluation is rampant in
many countries, e.g. Venezuela (2018: -99%), Argentina (2018: -
53.2%), Turkey (2018: -38.4%), and Brazil (2018: -20.6%). In the
United States, transacting in cash costs the consumer around 200
billion dollars annually - about $637 per person. The cost of cash is
primarily associated with counting, managing, storing, transporting,
guarding, and accounting for bank notes. The theft of cash alone
costs U.S. retail businesses lose around $40 billion annually.
Similarly, according to one study, one in every $12,400 of cash
notes printed may be counterfeit. The effect of corruption on
economic welfare is significant. More corrupt countries also
experience significantly lower rates of investment in the respective
country. Corrupt countries are also subject to a significantly higher
inflation rates. Several studies demonstrate that the poor and those
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

with less access to institutions bear a disproportionate share of these
costs of using cash.
Cash and bank notes are gradually losing ground to other payment
systems. Whereas the overwhelming majority of humans live in cash
economies where at least 90% of transactions are conducted in cash,
consumers in wealthier economies tend to favor noncash
alternatives. Cash usage in the United States, the United Kingdom,
the Netherlands, Sweden, Finland, Canada, France, among other
industrialized nations, has fallen well below 50% of total transaction
volume. Most significantly, in Northern Europe as few as one in
every five transactions are made in cash.
Central banks and governments around the world have been
experimenting with government-sponsored digital currencies and
cryptocurrencies since 2015. In the case of central banks, such
experimentation is already close to launch or fully operational.
Several governments have issued their own digital currencies. Most
major tech companies in the private sector have been experimenting
with cryptocurrency projects since 2017. Examples include Tunisia
(eDinar), Venezuela (Petro), Senegal (eCFA), Sweden (eKrona),
Dubai (EmCash), Japan (Jcoin), and Estonia (Estcoin), and Ecuador,
among others.
Several factors explain such early experimentation in the public
sector. The end of technological life cycles of legacy systems and
associated emerging trends in payment systems necessitate central
banks’ enhanced examination of cryptocurrency solutions. Central
banks in countries with rapidly declining cash usage are subject to
the most pressure to find solutions for bank note alternatives.
The private sector also continually engages in cryptocurrency
experimentation. Most cryptocurrency exchanges are creating their
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

own stable cryptocurrency. On February 14 2019, J.P. Morgan
introduced the first prototype of its blockchain settlement product:
JPM Coin, a stable cryptocurrency backed one-to-one by JPM’s fiat
currency reserves. Finally, Facebook’s Project Libra is developing
a stable cryptocurrency in an attempt to break into the financial
services business.
The rise of an early stable cryptocurrency design, Tether, in terms
of its total market capitalization, its stability around $1 value, and
investors’ uses of Tether as a temporary safe haven, provides some
support for stable cryptocurrencies’ ability to create market stability,
even if only temporarily. Like all other stable cryptocurrency
projects, Tether is still afflicted with significant design challenges.
The total volume of stable cryptocurrencies relative to the rest of the
cryptocurrency market is growing consistently. The growth of stable
cryptocurrencies can largely be traced back to attempts to combine
the utility and benefits of cryptocurrencies and blockchain
technology with remedies for the existing fluctuation and volatility
in the cryptocurrency markets. The growth data suggests that
demand for products that help manage the volatility inherent in other
crypto assets is likely to continue to increase.
Decentralization Neutralizers
Many leading legacy businesses are actively involved in attempts to
neutralize disruptive decentralized innovation. The smartphone
sector provides a prominent example. The smartphone sector has
demonstrated that 24/7 hour transactions are possible worldwide,
bringing knowledge and information to the edges, in any language
or currency, across borders, regardless of communication
technologies. The smartphone technology thus created new markets
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

with smaller players that are competing with leading legacy
businesses. Take for example what Skype did to the
telecommunication market. The competition to win the resulting
technology battle is intensifying at an alarming pace. In their
attempts to neutralize their decentralized competitor businesses,
legacy businesses are acquiring little-known companies with highly
competitive decentralized technologies. Microsoft’s acquisition of
Skype provides a prominent example. Legacy businesses’ attempts
to control decentralized competition is still in its infancy. The effect
of curtailing decentralized solutions by integrating them into
centralized power structures may actually be the long-term
incremental proliferation of decentralized solutions.
Some examples help illustrate the impact of technology on
industries and its accelerating pace. The travel industry, which
moved from established brick and mortar business to fully online
service providers, is just one example that illustrates the impact of
technology on industries and its accelerating pace. Even formerly
disruptive businesses, such as Amazon, as its platform ages after
over a decade without much change other than added categories, are
now forced to try to preserve their place in the respective industries.
Amazon has started to offer delivery as a service after getting a
lesson from the more aggressive Chinese providers, demonstrating
that Amazon had been out of touch with today’s technology
offerings.
Governmental decentralization trends (discussed above) are
counteracted by a political shift around the world. The lack of
legitimacy and antiestablishment surge in politics in combination
with growing public concerns about inequality, stagnating wages,
trade sanctions, immigration, the debt crisis, and China’s rising
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

power have fueled a recent political shift. Political parties in Europe
have started the gradual process of moving away from markets back
to the state. Political parties across Europe are emphasizing
increased welfare spending, renationalization of formerly privatized
public service providers, bigger pensions, and higher taxes for the
corporations, among other measures aiming to reverse decades of
pro-market policy. Political parties employ such measures in an
attempt to stop the exodus of voters to populist and
antiestablishment parties. Some analysts see this as a continuing
countertrend to the political decentralization in the 1970s under
Thatcher and Reagan, arguing that the zeitgeist of globalization and
liberalization is over.
The distributed app economy and decentralized commerce are
subject to multiple limitations. Currently, smart contracting and
DAOs are the focal point for the future of decentralization. Yet, in
2019, decentralized commerce is relegated to the trading and
exchange of cryptocurrencies and basic smart contracting. DAOs
are in their infancy and cannot currently overcome core governance
problems while maintaining a decentralized structure. The low
transaction throughputs of public blockchains is a core limitation
that holds back more advanced DApps. Some examples from
centralized businesses may suggest that these limitations can be
overcome relatively quickly in the future, if centralized technology
solutions are guideposts. For example, the proliferation of open
APIs by start-ups have influenced the financial sector significantly,
allowing companies like Facebook and Salesforce to rise from
nothing to dominance in a decade,
Other core infrastructure products that do not exist in 2019 but are
needed for the evolution of decentralized commerce include: (1)
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

truly decentralized consensus combined with higher levels of
transaction throughput. Currently, the data mining required to
provide scarcity also slows creation so that high speed transactions
cannot be achieved for the foreseeable future. (2) evolutionary
governance designs that overcome the need for hardforking, (3)
decentralized underwriting protocols that enable democratized
access to insurance, and (4) verification protocols for smart
contracting, among other decentralized infrastructure needs.
Without a core use case, other than the store of value (in Bitcoin),
decentralization technology is less likely to proliferate. Banking and
money transmission related services and triple entry accounting via
blockchain technology are natural use cases, but they fall short in
their application as the universal use cases for public blockchains.
While these use cases will likely be implemented sooner or later, the
proliferation of public blockchains may necessitate what is
commonly known as the “killer app.” Presently, it is still unclear
what that killer app may be. The recent experimentation by
Facebook’s Libra system can help provide some guidance on what
system requirements may work at scale.
User access and usability of existing decentralized technologies fall
short of mass adoption needs. In the current decentralized system
requirements, users are required to know quite a bit about their
security and overall system operations. Consumers need to manage
their own security access points. Currently, no system exists that
give consumers and an experience comparable to iTunes, helping
consumers manage access to decentralized currencies, decentralized
services, and other products. Without such intuitive consumer
support access points, it is difficult to see how decentralized systems
can ever reach mainstream consumer adoption. It will be very
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

difficult to educate the public sufficiently to seamlessly adopt
decentralized protocols in their daily life if users have to discern and
manage public and private keys to wallets, among other concerns.
Finally, people will not enter into a long-term smart contract unless
they have a stable currency to refer to. The current level of volatility
in cryptocurrencies does not lend itself to consumption. In other
words, if the consumer has to consider the investment implications
of using Bitcoin for a consumer transaction, e.g. “my banana is twice
as expensive this week if I pay in Bitcoin,” cryptocurrencies are less
likely to be used in consumer transactions. Similarly, a renter and a
landlord will not gamble their future wealth on a smart contract lease
that may halve or double in value in any given month.
The transferability of stores of value entailed in cryptocurrencies
creates core points of attack and undermines the very nature of
decentralization. Because of the store of value entailed in
cryptocurrencies (and really any currencies or store of value),
exercise of power over such value inevitably leads to centralization
due to economies of scale.
Unleashing the Power of Decentralization
The existing limitations for decentralized commerce can be
overcome. Emerging technological improvements, such as the
proliferation of smartphones, among others, enable overall higher
levels of applications of big data solutions and higher transaction
throughput in decentralized systems. The rapid advances of AI in
combination with big data and machine learning have already
affected many of the sectors of the economy. The combined effect
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

of AI, big data, sensors, and blockchain technology foreshadows a
market expansion for DApps.
Stable cryptocurrencies facilitate decentralized commerce. The
adoption, evolution, and acceleration of decentralized commerce
depends, in part, on the functioning and stability of
cryptocurrencies. Stable cryptocurrency designs allow most
cryptocurrency platforms to function better and provide more
stability for their users, if currency stability can be attained. Stable
cryptocurrencies can be expected to create widespread usage in
cryptoasset trading, payments for products and services in
decentralized applications, commerce across industries, and as a
treasury currency for decentralized projects. Because of their
disciplining and market stability enhancing effects, stable
cryptocurrencies are part of the future financial technology
infrastructure that will form the backbone of any emergence of the
distributed app economy and decentralized commerce. In turn,
decentralized commerce has knock-on effects for the evolution of
stable cryptocurrencies.
Decentralized underwriting is of core importance in any iteration of
future decentralized technology solutions. Without someone or
something that functions as an insurance policy should risks in
commerce materialize, the public has no reason to try to benefit from
the potential benefits of decentralized commerce, such as
substantively lower transaction and agency costs. Most
sophisticated smart contracts will require a form of
insurance/underwriting to offset the risks of possible failure. Most
legacy insurance companies will not consider underwriting a smart
contract that is not subject to the traditional legal framework. Even
if legacy insurance companies should over time begin to offer
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

insurance product for the DApp market, it is questionable if they
will be able to provide insurance products that actually fit the need
of emerging decentralized commerce. Actuarial methods for risk
assessment under traditional insurance metrics may be only partially
compatible with rapidly evolving decentralized products.
Decentralized underwriting is more adaptable and serves a particular
function in the proliferation of decentralized commerce.
Decentralized underwriting democratizes the functions of banking
and insurance. This makes these features of finance more efficient
because it frees untapped sources of knowledge. Democratizing
underwriting in this manner is also more secure and stable because:
1. It diversifies lenders and underwriters, which adds liquidity
in all states of the economy;
2. This diversity silos losses so there is less cascading during
economic crises;
3. Moral hazard detection and selection bias detection is
distributed, to access greater knowledge at the edge with more
opportunity for transparency, accuracy, and opportunity;
4. Blockchain technology is more transparent and therefore
more easily auditable, so an underwriting DAO is theoretically
capable of being more responsive to regulation (if its governance
process is well designed);
5. Democratized banking is more responsive to regulation
because ideas at the edge have a greater opportunity for affecting
policy than centralized structures such as the existing global
hierarchy which leads to a single group in Basel, Switzerland
providing the dominant voice.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

Decentralized banking frees economic resources that are less
optimally released in legacy banking. The slow, transparent
evolution of decentralized finance solves the multiple equilibria
problem of acquiring public confidence in the system that
underwriting provides in many areas. Banking works measurably
better when it reaches an equilibrium state that comes from public
confidence in the institution, and that public confidence is supported
by public confidence in a feedback loop that raises the efficiency of
an economy. Traditionally, this leap was made by governmental fiat,
e.g., FDIC underwriting backed (implicitly) by the US government.
Decentralized banking uses blockchain technology’s property of
complete transparency, a permanently uneditable record, and equal
access to all, in order to provide a continually auditable system to
slowly and stably build toward this higher equilibrium of public
confidence. As decentralized underwriting emerges, it may someday
in the future become a decentralized supplement to FDIC insurance
for banking services.
Emerging decentralized reputation systems facilitate and accelerate
evolving decentralized commerce. Why is decentralization
enhanced through decentralized reputation systems? Smart
contracts allow anonymous parties to engage in decentralized
commerce by providing automated contracting that self-executes
and self-regulates according to mathematical strictures. Smart
contracts are evolving quickly. Their evolution enables most
business logic to be included in smart contracts over time.
A simple example involving smart property may help illustrate the
uses of smart contracting. The example illustrates that smart
contracts can self-execute in a decentralized environment with
anonymous actors. Consider the example of a home owner making
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

her house available for rent. The home owner posts a smart contract
with the terms she will accept, including length of stay, price per
night etc. After encumbering an asset in the smart contract, a renter
would be able to unlock and use the house with a private key digital
signature which would only work for the contractually agreed period
paid. The smart lock of the house allows the renter to enter if and
when all conditions specified in the contract have been satisfied, e.g.
the deposit was encumbered and other qualifying criteria for the
renter were fulfilled. On the one hand, if the home is not in the
agreed upon condition at any time the rental contract started, the
smart contract could automatically reimburse (part of) the
encumbered deposit. In turn, if the house was not returned at the
agreed upon time, the renter would lose (part of) the encumbered
deposit.
Smart contracts provide multiple benefits for businesses. Smart
contracts are intended to simplify and automate business, removing
transaction costs, and creating certainty for counterparties. They
make business transactions fully secure and efficient. It is also
inexpensive to run smart contracts on a blockchain. The smart
contract near optimally coordinates the relationship between the
anonymous parties and removes the need for agency / intermediaries
almost entirely. Negotiation between counterparties is near minimal,
transaction cost typically associated with contracting are almost
entirely removed by the automation. The inherent mathematical
logic of computerized code in smart contracts can optimally clarify
parties’ intent. It also increases certainty and creates unparalleled
efficiency which in turn incentivizes commerce. Most importantly,
the smart contract removes centralized guarantors. The smart
contract self-regulates. Only limited legal recourse is available if
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

something goes wrong in the execution of the terms of the smart
contract.
Despite the significant benefits of smart contracting for business and
society, smart contracts are subject to significant limitations. Human
business interactions require a flexibility that is at odds with
merciless mathematical logic of smart contracts. Human interaction
requires flexibility in interpreting intent that cannot be ensured by
smart contracting because smart contract code does not follow the
same logic on similar terms as natural human language. Smart
contracts also undermine counterparties’ ability to continue
collaboration when unanticipated eventualities arise. In most cases
of unfulfilled parameters, the smart contract will simply cancel out.
Human business interaction also typically requires the possibility
that each party may fulfill only a portion of any intended
collaboration. While more sophisticated smart contracts over time
can fulfill some of these human business requirements, the needed
flexibility in existing decentralized protocols will unlikely ever be
attained unless a decentralized verification system is built into
decentralized commerce.
In as much as reputation enables truly decentralized solutions,
reputation is also the key ingredient that enables commerce.
Centralized capitalist institutions have been built entirely around
centralized and hierarchical reputation systems. Bitcoin proved that
a decentralized system can automate the transfer of valuable digital
currency without intermediaries, no centralized authority for
recourse, efficiently, securely, cheaply, and expeditiously. Until
blockchain technology was introduced via Bitcoin in 2009,
decentralized reputation systems mostly relied on the roughly 25
year old corruptible concept of the Web of Trust. Yet, Bitcoin and
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

other cybercurrencies have repeatedly been attacked successfully
and are plagued by security incidents. Whether such security
incidents are occurring on centralized cryptocurrency exchanges or
in other centralized systems that are appended to the decentralized
structures or the decentralized systems themselves is immaterial in
this context. The security concerns are seen by the public as a
technology risk across technologies.
Decentralized reputation verification systems enable
mathematically rigid smart contracts to become more adjustable for
the needs of business. Reputation verification becomes the backstop
for smart contracting. While the rigorous standard of “code is law”,
associated with smart contracting, can be upheld, reputation
verification enables smart contract template verification. Validated
templates of smart contracts increase trust for counterparties. The
validation removes the need for costly back-testing and
experimentation with smart contract templates.
Part 3: The Future
How to Make Money in Decentralization
Decentralized technology inaugurates new forms of economic
exchanges. Historical evidence has demonstrated that every time
decentralization emerges in a given industry, profit margins
disappear. Examples include Skype’s effect on the
telecommunications industry and Emule’s and Napster’s, among
other file sharing systems, effect on the music industry. Yet, these
are examples that predate the emergence of decentralized
technology. With the emergence of the Bitcoin protocol,
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

decentralized technology has created early structures that are
emerging into new forms of economic value systems and economic
exchange.
Human society and economic systems have revolved around
political doctrines for organizing society and allocating resources
for the last two centuries. First and foremost among those are the
dichotomies of capitalism and socialism which are seen as mutually
exclusive for the most part. Society is organized around those
notions and has formed power structures and political hierarchies to
serve these ideas.
Decentralization transcends traditional economic notions of
capitalism and socialism. Decentralization uses elements of profit
generation and redistribution in a way that in effect combines
capitalistic and socialistic ideas. Decentralization allows for the
organization of society in economic structures that generate profits
while at the same time redistributing resources.
Take for instance, the ability to sell one’s personal (e.g. social media
etc. consumption) data, preferences, opinions etc. in decentralized
systems, including in real time. Such assets, e.g. one’s data,
preferences, opinions etc. can only limitedly be commercialized in
existing centralized structures. In decentralized structures such
assets can be tokenized, valued, and mobilized. Similarly, tokenized
hard assets, such as real-estate, can be tokenized and sold in
unprecedented fractional forms. The ability to control one’s data and
fractionalized (hard) assets enables new forms of consumption for
consumers. For instance, many startups are already working on a
barter system in which services, such as free car rides etc., become
available in return for disclosure of consumer’s data and personal
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

preferences etc. These are only early examples of what decentralized
systems may facilitate for consumers in the new economy.
Centralized businesses will change as a result of the new
decentralized business structures that are emerging. Existing
centralized businesses have started to evaluate ways to expand
existing business lines or adapt other business lines to continue to
stay competitive with both centralized and decentralized business
competitors.
Responsible Decentralization
Common ethical principles define most governance structures.
Defining the boundaries for such a common ethical denominator has
proven difficult in any prior attempts to organize society.
Decentralized systems are no exception. Without a core common
ethical denominator, decentralized systems cannot last, they lose
coherence, become attackable, and can be corrupted, leading to
suboptimal societal outcomes.
Ethical governance is at the core of any ethical design of
decentralized systems. Blockchain technology offers humanity new
tools that directly address the problems at the root of why
governance has continually been plagued by corruption throughout
the ages. Blockchain technology gives uncensorable transparency
with its opposing tension of privacy; decentralization of power with
strict accounting for that power. As such, decentralized technology
has the potential to provide a better incentive design for ethical
decision making.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

Ethical governance asks: how will power over decision making be
distributed, i.e., as the system progresses in time, who will be
rewarded with more power and who will be punished with loss of
power? Secondly, who changes the rules governing the day-to-day
functioning of the decentralized system, and who changes the rules
governing how to change the rules? The first question concerns
executive governance and the second addresses legislative
governance.
These are essential questions that have plagued every human
organization that has ever existed. However, blockchain technology
gives humanity new tools for anonymity, transparency, and
permanency of records that can enable fully decentralized
governance, while maintaining privacy, distributing power justly
and efficiently, and preventing censorship.
By way of overview, the core objective of decentralized governance
designs is to create the proper incentives that help independent and
selfish actors to be organized and to collaborate productively
towards a common goal. From a quite pragmatic perspective,
addressing precise choices of parameters in algorithmic token
design, it is important to underscore which choices relate to which
values a group may prefer.
As a simple example, the profits of a DAO must be chosen to be
distributed in some ratio with the members who do the present work
which garners the profit, members who have previously done such
work which built the reputation of the DAO, members who designed
the protocols for how to do the work, and with members who
designed the governance structure which initiated the DAO. The
choice of distribution weights which determines how much each of
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

these four groups shares in the profit should match the current values
of the DAO. A greater share for new workers will attract new
workers, a greater share for the older workers will signal long-term
stability, while a greater share for the protocol designers will attract
more innovation.
Another core ethical governance problem revolves around system
attacks. Someone can always game the system. It is a mathematical
fact that is essentially encapsulated in the "Folk Theorems of game
theory". For any static set of rules in an infinitely repeated game
using reputation (stakes), there is a way to subvert the rules for an
individual’s profit at the expense of the group. A dynamic, changing
set of governance rules can address the conundrum, and can set up
the incentives necessary to stop the abuses.
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897

