2022 DAO FALLACIES
DAO FALLACIES
-
Common Myths and Uses for Decentralized Autonomous
Organizations
WULF A. KAAL*
Abstract
DAO myths are a natural by-product of technological evolution.
The paper debunks the top five DAO myths and explores the top
five DAO benefits and use cases.
Key Words: Decentralized Autonomous Organization, Digital
Assets, Valuation, Blockchain, Myth, Uses, Distributed Ledger
Technology, Emerging Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O3
* (c) 2022 Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law
(Minneapolis, USA).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... 3
II. TOP 5 DAO MYTHS ..................................................................................... 4
1. Myth #1: Fundraising ............................................................................. 4
2. Myth #2: Scams ....................................................................................... 5
a) Insider Abuses ................................................................................................... 6
b) External Takeovers ............................................................................................ 7
3. Myth #3: Ungovernable .......................................................................... 8
4. Myth #4: “Code is Law” Fallacies ............................................................ 9
5. Myth #5: Anonymity leads to Bad Actors ............................................... 10
III. TOP 5 DAO BENEFITS ............................................................................... 11
1. Use #1: Community Development ......................................................... 11
2. Use #2: Future of Work - Work to Earn ............................................... 12
a) Play-To-Earn .................................................................................................... 13
b) Learn-To-Earn .................................................................................................. 13
c) Work-To-Earn .................................................................................................. 14
3. Use #3: Micro-Democracy ..................................................................... 15
4. Use #4: Efficiency .................................................................................. 16
5. Use#5: Diversity .................................................................................... 17
IV. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................. 17
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
I. Introduction
Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) are not created
equal. At their best, DAOs replace large parts of society, business
operations across industries, and centralized human decision
making with micro-democratic attack resistant decentralized
decision making and governance. At their worst, DAOs result in
ponzi schemes and rug pulls that undermine the future of web3
and associated upgrades for humanity.
At their best, DAOs replace existing corporate earning
mechanisms for humans to earn a living with enhanced workflow,
independence, and democratic merit-based feedback in work to
earn structures. DAOs can result in an advanced state of
automation and human connectivity where smart contracts,
algorithms, and code replace human input within an organization
to coordinate human collectives efficiently and in an attack
resistant way.
DAOs have the potential to substantially upgrade the way humans
work. Rather than serving a principal who determines where,
what, and when workers have to perform, which often results in a
long list of suboptimal outcomes that derive from non-
intrinsically motivated work, DAOs allow influence and outcomes
of DAO members to be determined by the value a DAO member’s
contributions to the shared work product. Moreover, if a DAO
member adds substantial value to the DAO, other DAO token
holders will want to add their skills to the same work product via
a policing engagement which focuses all DAO members’ joint
efforts on the highest possible value proposition. This “value to
effort focus of work flows” in the DAO structure has the potential
to revolutionize the way society works.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
In their existing format, DAOs can reinvigorated a foundation,
donor-advised fund, and crypto foundation. DAOs have the
potential to overcome the inefficiencies and principal-agent
problems of the modern-day corporation.
In 2022, DAOs are already trusted with billions in assets under
management and generate significant APY in DeFi transactions.
DAOs handle the day-to-day operations and governance of large
funding pools and coordinate payouts across businesses
according to democratic rules. If executed properly, they are an
effective structure for charity, online community, democracy,
business and general governance.
At their worst, DAOs are unorganized, inefficient, slow,
exploitable, and deceptive. Several of the identifiable downsides
include: siphoned coins, distracted and robo voters,
centralization, DAO washing by founders, lack of decentralized
governance, and other pitfalls that could end up in mid-term and
long-term DAO failure.
In 2021 alone, the total illicit revenue from crypto scams was $7.7
billion; 37% of that total resulted from “rug pulls,” an increase
from the 1% of total illicit revenue in 2020. Although these dollar
amounts mirrored a general rise in crypto prices in 2021, the
increase in deceptive “rug pulls” illuminates a familiar maxim:
more money, more problems.
II. Top 5 DAO Myths
Because the DAO space is still largely in its infancy,
misconceptions and myths are prevalent. Below are several of the
core myths that need to be proven wrong.
1. Myth #1: Fundraising
Like any new technology and societal development, DAO myths
are a natural by-product of technological evolution. Myths and
misconceptions about DAOs are natural because the underlying
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
technology is so new and underdeveloped. Governance
experimentation for DAOs is in the very early stages which
naturally creates failures and associated misconceptions and
myths.
The most common DAO myth in 2022 is probably that the primary
function of DAOs is fundraising. Indeed, many DAOs are created for
the purpose of fundraising. For example, ConstitutionDAO, Spice
DAO, and Dune DAO, are all popular fundraisers.1 Members of
such DAOs receive DAO tokens proportional to their donation
value in fungible tokens. Like the first DAO, subsequent fundraiser
DAOs are useful to attract the mainstream to the concept of a DAO
and its broader sets of uses in business and society.
Fundraiser DAOs are vulnerable in multiple ways. They often lack
incentives for meaningful community engagement and tend to
dissipate with the hype. Governance through fungible tokens in
fundraiser DAOs allows whales to control the DAO, which is
antithetical to the idea of DAOs overall and decentralized
governance of DAOs specifically. More specifically, selling
purchasable voting power via fungible tokens risks hostile
takeovers or looting. Although many fundraiser DAOs are
popular, they do not represent the greater purpose DAOs have on
the future of work and community engagement.
2. Myth #2: Scams
The second most common myth is that DAOS are generally set up by
scammers and that DAOs are rife with deception and scams. While it
is true that many DAOs and DAO users have fallen victim to the
infamous rug-pulls, most of these rug pulls are associated with the
lack of decentralized governance in fundraiser DAOs.
Of the top six crypto rug pulls in 2021, two were DAO projects.
Anubis DAO, which is reported to have lost nearly $60 million in
1 Will Gottsegen, DAOs and the Next Crowdfunding Gold Rush, CoinDesk, (Dec.
6, 2021 at 1:58p.m. CST). DAOs Are the Next Crowdfund Gold Rush
(coindesk.com)
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
an alleged rug pull; and Snowdog DAO, reported to have lost $30
million.
The below examples highlight the abuse potential for DAOs that
did not follow proper governance.
a) Insider Abuses
Most DAOs that fall victim to unethical behavior and rug pulls are
subject to abuses from insiders. Typically these insider abuses are
possible because the insiders are not governed properly and have
too much control over the DAO. True decentralized community
governance removes the control over keys and code by councils
and privileged insiders.
Anubis DAO (a fork of Olympus DAO) launched a token sale on the
Copper platform on Oct. 28 2021. The sale attracted substantial
interest from investors as the project raised $60M worth of ETH
in under 24 hours. As the sale was about to close, 13597 ETH was
removed from the token sale pool and sent to another
address. Allegations of a rug pull ensued because the launch
platform Copper had not been compromised.
Snowdog DAO (Avalanche protocol) experienced similar abuses.
For example, Snowdog DAO suffered an alleged rug-pull when an
insider who knew a “challenge key” (a part of the DAOs contract),
backran the anticipated buyback and began selling tokens. Many
suspect an insider made almost $10M as the SDOG was converted
to other currencies.2 As a result, SDOG price quickly lost 90% of
its value.3 This project seemed especially suspect because many
“mainstream crypto promoters” aggressively promoted Snowdog
prior to the incident.4 Although examples like this
understandably trigger reluctance, there are multiple sustainable
DAOs which mechanically prevent such scams.
2 Snowdog Allegedly Falls Victim to Largest Rug-Pull in Avalanche History,
Dreamchain, (Nov. 26, 2021). Snowdog Allegedly Falls Victim to Largest Rug-
Pull in Avalanche History - DreamChain
3 Id.
4 Id.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
b) External Takeovers
Anubis DAO and Snowdog DAO provide examples of DAO abuses
where the core team failed to maintain integrity from within. But
these inside rug pulls are not the only exploitative mechanism
within DAOs. DAOs can also be exploited from the outside if the
DAO’s governance allows fungible voting power.
The lack of proper decentralized governance with non-fungible
tokens is a key common denominator among DAO failures and rug
pulls. DAOs are controlled by their stakeholders, i.e.,
“tokenholders.” These tokenholders can use their holdings to
make proposals, guide the treasury, etc. Other tokenholders
within the DAO can vote on whether these proposals should be
executed or not. The democratic process and the expected attack
resistance are undermined by improper DAO governance. The
Build Finance DAO provides a prominent example of a DAO that
had a malicious actor who was able to acquire a majority stake in
a DAO that is governed with fungible currencies that can be
bought on exchanges.
The Build Finance DAO labeled itself as a venture builder that was
owned and operated by the community. The Build Finance DAO’s
purpose was to provided services to other DAOs by identifying
business ideas, organizing teams, sourcing capital, helping govern
product entities, and providing shared service. The Build Finance
DAO highlights the potential for abuse in systems without proper
decentralize governance. An attacker acquired funding necessary
to act opportunistically in the Build Finance DAO. The attacker
put forward a proposal that granted themselves control of all key
infrastructure of the DAO and the token holders did not control
enough counter votes to prevent the takeover.5 The attacker
minted and sold various tokens by draining liquidity pools.6
5 Mike Dalton, Build Finance DAO Suffers Governance Takeover Attack,
CyptoBriefing, (Feb. 15, 2022). Build Finance DAO Suffers Governance
Takeover Attack - Crypto Briefing
6 Id.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
Because the Build Finance DAO allowed token holders to have
input on spending decisions of the DAO, the attacker put forward
a proposal that granted themselves control. Because of the lack of
decentralized power in the Build Finance DAO, the silent majority
of token holders did not have enough voting power to prevent the
takeover. As a result, the attacker minted and sold various tokens
by draining liquidity pools. The attacker also gained control of
minting keys, governance contracts, and the treasury. The Build
Finance DAO lost complete control over any part of the key
infrastructure.
The takeover of the Build Finance DAO highlights the need for
sustainable decentralized governance solutions with non-fungible
tokens to defend the DAO from attackers/looters and punish self-
dealing.
3. Myth #3: Ungovernable
The third myth that afflicts the development of DAOs is that DAOs
are ungovernable. The word “ungovernable” implies that
sufficiently decentralized governance has not been invented to
effectively govern DAO concepts. The myth gets perpetuated
because many DAOs are still in the early stages of experimentation
with DAO designs and decentralized governance. Governance is
severely underdeveloped in most DAOs which results typically in
a minority of stakeholders that define governance. This, in turn,
often result in mediocre and poorly-developed proposals.7
While these shortcomings in the DAO ecosystem are real, the
experimentation with DAO governance designs is gradually
identifying workable decentralized governance solutions for the
DAO ecosystem. The key component of that experimentation
revolve around the following key metrics:
7 Amrit Kumar, Ownerless Ownership, Trustless Trust - DAOs, the Future of
Governance, beINcrypto, (Sep. 13, 2021). Ownerless Ownership, Trustless Trust
— DAOs, the Future of Governance (beincrypto.com)
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
1. Non-fungible Tokens or weighted keys, among other
electronic accounting methods as accounting for
reputation score NOT fungible tokens
2. Two vote model a) loosely coupled vote (no reputation at
stake), b) tightly coupled vote (reputation at stake)
3. Reputation generated ONLY for long term valuable work
and policing of work NOT for business development work
4. Calculation of reputation voting engine with 50/50 up
down
5. Reputation salary in fungible token pro rata to reputation
score at point of payment
6. Full voting record transparency
4. Myth #4: “Code is Law” Fallacies
The fourth myth is that the Code is Law doctrine creates rigid rules
that undermines the dynamic business environment in web3. Smart
contracts help implement the code is law doctrine in web3
business solutions. Yet, smart contracts involving fungible
currency exchanges are designed to guarantee irreversible,
unreviewable, programmed self execution. As such, they create a
more rigid structure for business in web3.
In reality, very rarely does any business venture proceed exactly
as planned in smart contract code because the reality of business
relationships is far more messy and multivalent than can be
predicted by a series of smart contracts.8 To do business
effectively, counterparties need confidence that a fair resolution
will occur when transactions do not develop as planned.
Effective human-centric DAO governance solves the issue of rid
smart contract rules that undermine business activities that
require more flexibility in web3 and the metaverse. Through
effective human-centric DAO governance, the instability
generated by the rigidity of the rules is solved by making the rules
8 Bob Greenlee, DAOs as the future? Hard pass, thanks, TechCrunch, (Dec. 1,
2021). DAOs as the future? Hard pass, thanks | TechCrunch
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
dynamic which includes both short-term and long-term
protocols.9
5. Myth #5: Anonymity leads to Bad Actors
The fifth myth revolves around the role of anonymity in DAOs.
Anonymity is often seen as a way to corrupt human behavior, as
in “what do you have to hide”. The notion of “sunlight is the best
disinfectant” holds large sway in governance circles.
Transparency is seen as the ultimate enforcer of accountability.
Anonymous decentralized networks may encourage troll
behavior. That is, people in anonymous networks may behave in
ways they would not engage in had they been identified. In other
words, anonymous participants might feel safe to attack others
without retribution. Most anonymous interactions/comments in
Web 2.0 are worthless without communicating any lasting
connections that can improve society. In the DAO context, trolling
behavior destabilizes the organization and causes friction
between members and the DAO.
By contrast, if implemented correctly, anonymity significantly
upgrades DAO governance. The friction that arises from
anonymous trolling can be mitigated through the implementation
of incentivized reputational architecture governed by protocols
decided upon by the community.10 If properly implemented,
anonymity strengthens decentralized governance by taking out
parts of the human nature that hold business and society back.
First and foremost, anonymity allows individuals to relate to each
other without the inherited biases of generations of predecessors
and a lifetime of existing in centralized power structures and
associated societal expectations on individuals. This in turn,
9 Craig Calcaterra & Wulf Kaal, Decentralization: Technology’s Impact on
Organizational and Societal Structure, 153 (2021).
10 Id, at 68.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
allows information to flow from the edges of the system with
individuals who would have no agency in centralized structures
but can add invaluable input into the system. Such inputs will not
materialize, or are much less likely to materialize, if DAO
participants know each other. In this sense, while it is eternally
difficult with existing technology to attain true anonymity in web3
systems, anonymity in DAO governance is the wholly grail of
decentralized web3 business and society.
III. Top 5 DAO Benefits
Despite the myths, DAOs can have many positive impacts on
business and society through the future of work, micro-
democracy, and community engagement. DAOs can create a world
where value exchange is based on outcomes rather than tasks.
They are a tool to overcome the inefficiencies and burdens of
modern centralized institutions.
1. Use #1: Community Development
DAOs provide an efficient and low-cost way of community
development and participation. DAOs can be seen as a
programmable organization of people that form around a shared
mission and foster emergent online communities.11 DAO
members have intrinsic and extrinsic incentives to collaborate
with other DAO communities to bolster each other’s capabilities.12
A meaningful reputation governance and accounting mechanism
for motivating business and governance participation encourages
mutually beneficial contributions to the community. Proper
reputation accounting switches the incentives from short-term
11 Michael O’Rourke, DAOs will be the future of online communities in five years,
CoinTelegraph, (Oct. 23, 2021). DAOs will be the future of online communities in
five years (cointelegraph.com)
12 Id.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
zero-sum thinking to long-term positive-sum motivation.13
Members who actively contribute positively within a DAO can be
continually rewarded (and thereby incentivized) to maintain their
behavior. Fundamentally, users will want to maintain the
community as they are directly incentivized to do.
2. Use #2: Future of Work - Work to Earn
The traditional work environment in centralized structures is
prone to extrinsically motivated work engagement which
intensifies principal agent problems. Rather than serving a
principal who determines where, what, and when workers have
to perform, which often results in a long list of suboptimal
outcomes that derive from non-intrinsically motivated work.
DAOs have the potential to substantially upgrade the way humans
work. DAOs free individuals from anyone except themselves, their
own actions, and the projects they share values and skillsets with
and focus energy on. DAOs allow influence and outcomes of DAO
members to be determined by the value a DAO member’s
contributions to the shared work product. Moreover, if a DAO
member adds substantial value to the DAO, other DAO token
holders will want to add their skills to the same work product via
a policing engagement which focuses all DAO members’ joint
efforts on the highest possible value proposition. This “value to
effort focus of work flows” in the DAO structure has the potential
to revolutionize the way society works.
Braintrust, for example, is a decentralized talent network with
algorithmically controlled marketplace governed by network
participants. 14 The Braintrust network has tens of thousands of
talent participants and hundreds of Fortune 1000 companies,
13 Calcaterra & Kaal, supra note 10, at 127.
14 Braintrust Whitepaper, Braintrust: The Decentralized Talent Network, The
Braintrust Technology Foundation, (Sep. 2021). Braintrust: The Decentralized
Talent Network (usebraintrust.com)
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
processing millions of dollars in transactions each month.
Braintrust users earn native token BTRST by
introducing/onboarding clients (demand) and talent (supply).
Clients use BTRST to enhance job postings. Talent use BTRST to
enhance their proposals or take courses to level up their
skills. Despite its advances in innovation for redefining work
outcomes, Braintrust uses a suboptimal governance model with a
one token, one vote system for proportional control over how the
network is governed.
a) Play-To-Earn
The future of work offered by DAOs is not limited to traditional
employment either. Some projects incentivize users through a
different business model, play-to-earn.15 Play-to-earn games are
based on a business model where users play a game and earn
some reward for their engagement and time. Projects that
leverage play-to-earn business models often do so by using either
NFT items with variable scarcity (e.g. weapons, skins, monsters),
which can be purchased or sold on the open market or by using a
certain type of cryptocurrency or play-to-earn token, which is
generally created by game developers.
b) Learn-To-Earn
Similar to the play-to-earn business model, some projects are
offering learn-to-earn programs.16 In this model, users watch
videos or read articles, take quizzes, and can earn a specified
amount of crypto assets as rewards.
15 David Vidal-Tomas, The new crypto niche: NFTs, play-to-earn, and metaverse
tokens, Munich Personal RePEc Archive, (Jan. 2, 2022).
*MPRA_paper_111351.pdf (uni-muenchen.de)
16 Ehsan Yazdanparast, All You Need to Know About “Learn and Earn” Crypto
Programs, Medium, (Nov. 28, 2021). All You Need to Know About “Learn and
Earn” Crypto Programs | by Ehsan Yazdanparast | Coinmonks | Medium
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
Two recognized types of learn-to-earn programs exist. Learn-to-
earn programs are either offered by centralized exchanges where
users complete tasks through the exchanges and receive rewards
directly on the exchange. Or, learn-to-earn programs are offered
by projects or partners of the projects where users are required
to provide their wallet addresses to projects. Once the task is
completed, the project transfers the rewards to the user.
c) Work-To-Earn
Work-to-earn structures are intended to free participants from the
strictures of traditional corporate structures.17 Work-to-earn
DAOs allows anyone, anywhere, at any time to work for a digital
community. Work-to-Earn has been analogized to a party bike or
a group paddle boat where individual participants can choose to
contribute to the group effort as much as the individual desires to
move the organization forward, or not contribute at all.18 In this
work structure, it is entirely up to the individual how much they
want to contribute.
DAOs need human labor, whether it's for a protocol DAO looking
to create new FinTech, or a Social DAO looking to propagate
culture. In order to attract long-term talent, it needs to be always
up to each individual DAO member how much time they put in.
DAOs that create quota and participation requirements may not
be sustainable long-term in a work-to-earn value-to-efforts
workflow environment.
Reputation accounting allows more opportunities to arise to
individuals who build their reputation within the DAO - it may
17 Lucas Campbell, How to Get Paid by DAOs, Bankless, (Oct. 20, 2021) How to
get paid by DAOs - Bankless (banklesshq.com)
18 Id.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
start as a one-off bounty, then part-time, then potentially a full
time gig.
3. Use #3: Micro-Democracy
Through smart contracting, DAOs enable forms of micro-democratic
structures. Micro-democracies in modern information technology
can help every member of an open society to participate directly
in the decision-making of every community affair. 19
Several DAO projects seek to harness the benefits of blockchain to
facilitate micro-democracy. Projects like Proof of Humanity and
UBI DAO offer democratic solutions through on-chain verified
human beings.20 Users can “vouch” for each other with financial
stake, while false vouchers are punished. Verified users can accrue
tokens that get streamed directly to their address. Of course, these
attempts are all falling victim to web-of-trust theory that has been
proven to not work long-term because the sockpuppet attacks
that are inevitable in this design.21
Microdemocracy and proper incentive design can reverse
decreasing voter participation that undermines representative
democracies.22 Microdemocratic voting would provide a more
immediate feedback system between voters and their
representatives. Because decentralized technology enables the
transparent and incorruptible tallying of votes, nearly
instantaneously, voting can be more dynamic and incremental -
political will can be exercised more directly.
19Aaron Ran, Micro Democracy: The Democracy Revolution of the Information
Era, (2020).
20 Divya Siddarth et al, Who Watches the Watchmen? A Review of Subjective
Approaches for Sybil-resistance in Proof of Personhood Protocols, Proof of
Personhood: A Review, 13 (2020). 2008.05300.pdf (arxiv.org)
21 https://wulfkaal.com/2020/05/25/self-sovereign-identity/
22 Calcaterra & Kaal, supra note 10, at 165.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
Quadratic voting, for example, allows a first glimpse of the
innovations that are possible with micro democratic systems.23
Each voter may be given a limited number of VOTE tokens which
may be spent on any issue the voter is concerned with during a set
period. Users who allocate more VOTE tokens, have a bigger
influence in the outcome than users who allocates less.
4. Use #4: Efficiency
DAOs improve economic efficiency. One of the problems with
centralized structures is that power accumulates which is bad for
market efficiency and liquidity.24 Markets are the most efficient
mechanism for price discovery. The market determines how
many members a DAO can support in its network, and how much
work they should do. Markets help determine the equilibrium
between all the industries and companies to determine how much
of each work and good is required to keep an organization running
efficiently.
Decentralization improves the market in its efficiency at price
discovery and liquidity.25 The liquidity of a market is its
momentum. Liquidity is measured by its velocity (dynamism,
motion, rate of transactions), but also by its mass (how valuable
are the total goods or assets). When there is too much mass and
not enough velocity, it can gunk up the engine - when there is too
little mass in the market, it can be cleared too quickly.
Centralization and monopolies are a threat to market liquidity as
they can have too much mass or too much velocity. Decentralized
structures are better because mass and velocity are uncorrelated
23 Steven Lalley & Glen Weyl, Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism Design Can
Radicalize Democracy, American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings,
1(1), 2018.
24 Calcaterra & Kaal, supra note 10, at 123.
25 Calcaterra & Kaal, supra note 10, at 124.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
meaning more stable and predictable liquidity and therefore,
more market efficiency.
5. Use#5: Diversity
DAOs encourage diversity of thought, background, and skillset.
Diversity of viewpoints is severely diminished when power is
centralized. Information technology allows a global network of
people to form, open to members of diverse values and
backgrounds.26
For example, market decentralization via Initial Coin Offerings
(ICOs) provide lower barriers to entry for a more diverse body of
investors and thus increase the diversity and the heterogeneity of
start-up funding. Borderless ICOs are directly marketed to a
worldwide potential pool of investors. Flatter markets with more
diverse interests and talents are more effective and efficient at
achieving truth discovery, like price discovery and the
identification of ideal solutions to arbitrary new problems that
arise.27 Decentralization and DAOs promote that diversity by
improving its members autonomy and freedom, nurturing their
natural development.
IV. Conclusion
This paper has evaluated common DAO myths. Counteracting the
DAO myths, the author has shown that the opportunities for
business and society that are presented by well-functioning DAOs
are unparalleled.
26 Calcaterra & Kaal, supra note 10, at 35.
27 Calcaterra & Kaal, supra note 10, at 235.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

2022 DAO FALLACIES
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

DAO FALLACIES
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4067783

