DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
Wulf A. Kaal**
Abstract
Decentralization cannot evolve in a vacuum. As decentralized
technology becomes increasingly available, its application,
adaptation, and evolution depend on society’s acceptance and use
of the technology. While improved decentralized incentive designs
can accelerate adoption, design alone will not suffice in promoting
the decentralization of business and society. Several factors call
into question society’s engagement with decentralized
technologies. Such factors can be seen as decentralization
neutralizers. They are plentiful and undermine society’s
engagement with emerging decentralized technologies and the
solutions it may offer for society. The article discusses these
decentralization neutralizers and points out possible solutions.
Key Words: Decentralization, Neutralizers, Digital Assets,
Decentralized Finance, Blockchain, Start-up, Decentralized
Commerce, Emerging Technology, Token Models, Incentive
Design, Tokens, Distributed Ledger Technology, Decentralized
Infrastructure, Reputation Staking
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
** Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis,
USA). The author is gratefull for ongoing discussions about decentralized
technology solutions with Craig Calcaterra. The author is also grateful for
outstanding research assistance from Hayley Howe and research librarian
assistance from Nicole Kinn. The author did not receive any form of financial
incentive for authoring this article.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................. 3
II. DEGREES OF DECENTRALIZATION ....................................................... 7
III. S-CURVE OF CENTRALIZATION ....................................................... 9
IV. PATH DEPENDENCIES ................................................................... 10
V. CONSTITUTIONAL DEMOCRACIES ...................................................... 13
VI. DEMOCRATIC LEGITIMACY OF CODE ............................................ 14
VII. TERRITORIAL INTEGRITY OF NATION STATES ................................ 17
VIII. DOGMATISM ................................................................................ 18
IX. REGULATION ............................................................................... 20
X. CENTRALIZED ALGORITHMIC AUTOMATION ...................................... 22
XI. LACK OF DECENTRALIZED GOVERNANCE SYSTEMS ...................... 28
XII. DECENTRALIZED INFRASTRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS ......................... 31
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

I. Introduction
Decentralization cannot evolve in a vacuum. As decentralized
technology becomes increasingly available, its application,
adaptation, and evolution depend on society’s acceptance and use
of the technology. While improved decentralized incentive designs
can accelerate adoption, design alone will not suffice in promoting
the decentralization of business and society.
Several factors call into question society’s engagement with
decentralized technologies. Such factors can be seen as
decentralization neutralizers. They are plentiful and undermine
society’s engagement with emerging decentralized technologies
and the solutions it may offer for society.
Analog habits remain strong. People who were raised in the analog
age have been socialized into engaging in certain basic work
related and social habits that are very hard to change. For
example, the analog media such as vinyl or magnetized tape have
a cult-like following despite their clear disadvantages including
imperfections that cause cracking and popping noise. Their
followers consider such technology imperfections a more humane
and natural human-technology interaction. Other examples include
peoples’ reliance on printing to get “serious work” done. While
the content is the same, people somehow believe that their
interaction with old technology formats ensures superior outputs.
Psychologically, one may speculate, such reactionary perspectives
may stem from a feeling of control over content that seems
otherwise uncontrollable with modern technology. Believe in the
superiority of outdated technology is prevalent in society, even
among intellectual elites.
Humans are analog beings with natural limitations. Humans’
ability to store information is different from artificial intelligence.
AI is based on the precise and incorruptible memory of computers.
Artificial intelligence so far has been digital but may morph into
something entirely different. Even if AI, neuroscience, and
collective intelligence converge eventually, if remains unclear if
advanced AI will be neuromorphic. Yet, emerging decentralized
technology offers unprecedented programmable incentives in peer
technologies that allows humans to become ever more connected
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
and better collaborators. The coordination of human brain
capacities, that is collective intelligence, while inherently risky,
may be a way for humans to become more than analog beings.
Many leading legacy businesses are actively involved in attempts
to neutralize disruptive decentralized innovation. The smartphone
sector provides a prominent example. The smartphone sector has
demonstrated that 24/7 hour transactions are possible worldwide,
bringing knowledge and information to the edges, in any language
or currency, across borders, regardless of communication
technologies. The smartphone technology thus created new
markets with smaller players that are competing with leading
legacy businesses. Take for example what Skype did to the
telecommunication market. The competition to win the resulting
technology battle is intensifying at an alarming pace. In their
attempts to neutralize their decentralized competitor businesses,
legacy businesses are acquiring little-known companies with
highly competitive decentralized technologies. Microsoft’s
acquisition of Skype provides a prominent example. Legacy
businesses’ attempts to control decentralized competition is still in
its infancy. The effect of curtailing decentralized solutions by
integrating them into centralized power structures may actually be
the long-term incremental proliferation of decentralized solutions.
Some examples help illustrate the impact of technology on
industries and its accelerating pace. The travel industry, which
moved from established brick and mortar business to fully online
service providers, is just one example that illustrates the impact of
technology on industries and its accelerating pace. Even formerly
disruptive businesses, such as Amazon, as its platform ages after
over a decade without much change other than added categories,
are now forced to try to preserve their place in the respective
industries. Amazon has started to offer delivery as a service after
getting a lesson from the more aggressive Chinese providers,
demonstrating that Amazon had been out of touch with today’s
technology offerings.
Governmental decentralization trends (discussed above) are
counteracted by a political shift around the world. The lack of
legitimacy and antiestablishment surge in politics in combination
with growing public concerns about inequality, stagnating wages,
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

trade sanctions, immigration, the debt crisis, and China’s rising
power have fueled a recent political shift. Political parties in
Europe have started the gradual process of moving away from
markets back to the state. Political parties across Europe are
emphasizing increased welfare spending, renationalization of
formerly privatized public service providers, bigger pensions, and
higher taxes for the corporations, among other measures aiming to
reverse decades of pro-market policy. Political parties employ
such measures in an attempt to stop the exodus of voters to
populist and antiestablishment parties. Some analysts see this as a
continuing countertrend to the political decentralization in the
1970s under Thatcher and Reagan, arguing that the zeitgeist of
globalization and liberalization is over.
Decentralized systems and tribal structures evolved, morphed, and
adapted as centralized systems were adopted by society.
Decentralized systems evolved out of a naturally decentralized
order of nature. Centralized solutions started to emerge in society
to manage the seemingly disorganized and unpredictable chaos of
nature. Without attempting to give a full account of anthropology
and the move from decentralized human organization to
centralized human organization, humans living in organized
groups could maintain their life spans better and live better lives
through coordinated action vis-à-vis nature than humans who did
not centrally organize their groups. Efficiencies of centralized
organization facilitated higher likelihoods of survival. Over time,
such centrally organized groups evolved into tribal structures. In
an effort to protected its members and utilize scarce resources
most efficiently, most tribes utilized different forms of centralized
and often patriarchy-based and enforced order and associated
centralized hierarchy. With the introduction of property rights and
associated economic order, tribes expanded into urbanized
structures to, again, enhance efficiency of production of scarce
resources and centralized distribution thereof. Urbanized
structures over time evolved into centrally controlled countries
with centrally organized governments and centralized societal
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
mechanics. With some notable exceptions,1 it was only through
the emergence of decentralized technology, in the 1990s with the
internet and in 2008 with blockchain technology, that developed
centralized and mostly western first world countries started to
experiment with decentralized solutions for society.
In the early 2010s, groups of technologists and believers in
technology-enabled decentralized networks, orders, and solutions
began to consider technology alternatives for societal order. Given
the perceived downsides of centrally coordinated and government
controlled hierarchies in society, including the negative effects on
innovation, equity, and sustainability, the merging decentralized
systems became increasingly attractive and their support groups
proliferated around the world. The increasing mainstream
acceptance of Bitcoin and the prospect of quick riches through
investments in initial coin offerings broadened the scope of the
decentralized community from technologists and idealists to
include digital asset investors and institutional investors.
In the early 2020s, the characteristics of the existing pool of
proponents of decentralized technologies have inhibiting effects
on the evolution of decentralization. The initial crypto community
emerged in the 2010s, in the aftermath of the publication of
Satoshi Nakamoto’s Bitcoin whitepaper, with a strong libertarian
focus. The idea of reforming society with decentralized
technology remains strong in the crypto community. As a result,
cooperation with existing centralized structures is often
suboptimal. This is perhaps best illustrated by the debate between
proponents of central bank issued digital currencies that are
centrally controlled and the proponents of more decentralized
protocols and more decentralized issuers of cryptocurrencies in the
early 2020s. Rather than seeing the central bank issued digital
currencies as a pathway to mainstream acceptance of more
decentralized cryptocurrencies, the decentralized issuers of digital
assets and their community perceived their centralized
counterparts as a threat.
1 The Apache tribe for example, that maintained a decentralized tribal order
through most of its history.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

Between 20010 and 2020, the prospect of quick profits attracted a
clientel to the community that was more interested in investment
opportunities than decentralized solutions. With it came fraud in
the digital asset space which was rampant and created a chasm
between the decentralized assets space and mainstream investors.
Mainstream investors often perceived digital assets as too risky
and likely to be involved in forms of fraud. The lacking regulatory
certainty and lacking regulatory recognition of cryptocurrencies
exacerbated this trends. The single focus on Bitcoin as store of
value and investment in large parts of the evolving decentralized
community extends the negative effects for the foreseeable future.
Even those parts of the decentralized technology community that
value decentralized technology solutions for society over
investments and profits derived from cryptocurrencies are siloed
and do not sufficiently engage with each other. Decentralized
technology systems require interoperability for survivability. Yet,
most platforms attempt to make it alone in an effort to become the
next Bitcoin. As a result, decentralized community silos
proliferate. The decentralized technology infrastructure solutions
that are required cannot be build by one protocol alone.
Cooperation is inevitably needed.
II. Degrees of Decentralization
Since the inception of decentralized networking technologies in
the 2010s, researchers have debated the possibility of full and
sustainable decentralization in computing systems.2 Still in the
2 Buterin, Vitalik & Weyl, Glen (May 21, 2018). Liberation Through Radical
Decentralization. Medium: Cryptocurrency,
https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/liberation-through-radical-
decentralization-22fc4bedc2ac; Bonneau, Joseph, Miller, Andrew, Clark,
Jeremy, Narayanan, Arvind, Kroll, Joshua A., & Felten, Edward W. (2015).
SoK: Research Perspectives and Challenges for Bitcoin and Cryptocurrencies,
in 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7163021; Kwon, Yujin, Liu, Jian, Kim,
Minjeong, Song, Dawn, & Kim, Yongdae (2019). Impossibility of Full
Decentralization in Permissionless Blockchains. Association for Computer
Machinery, https://webee.technion.ac.il/people/ittay/aft19/aft19-final31.pdf.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
early 2020s, decentralized technologies facilitated suboptimal
degrees of decentralization out of necessity. For example,
Bitcoin’s Proof-of-Work (PoW) consensus algorithm required
multiple nodes to verify and facilitate transactions. In return for
making their computing capacity available, Bitcoin miners were
rewarded a portion of the transaction fees as well as the
opportunity to claim the reward for the creation of a Bitcoin block.
In the early 2020s, the Bitcoin block reward was about 12.5
bitcoins, issued circa 144 times per day. The economic nature of
these rewards incentivizes degrees of centralization in collective
action of nodes that share in the mining rewards as a group, so
called mining pools. Similarly, experimentation with other forms
of consensus algorithms that promise to overcome the downsides
of PoW, such as the high energy consumption of mining, including
but not limited to Proof-of-Stake (PoS) and Delegated-Proof-of-
Stake (DPoS), have routinely made compromises with regards to
the degree of decentralization to attain other benefits, such as
scaling and/or security.
The debate on the possible degree of decentralization has
insufficiently taken into account the path dependencies that are
created by existing technology decentralization. Early stage
decentralized technologies display clear limitations. For example,
PoW, PoS, and DPoS, among others, create a community believe
system in certain foundational technology features that in effect
inhibit higher degrees of decentralization in technology. As a
result of the suboptimal degrees of technology decentralization in
early stage technology, community understanding of degrees of
decentralization became distorted and perpetuated suboptimal
technology decentralization while inhibiting higher degrees of
decentralization in the technology infrastructure.
Even if full and sustainable decentralization may not be possible in
computing systems, ever enhancing degrees of decentralization
bring with them the promise of freeing human and machine
networks and network governance from the age-old foundational
problems of tyranny and corruption. Even smaller degrees of
decentralization in network technology can have highly disruptive
effects on the then existing systems in society. The most
applicable and disruptive use cases of decentralized technologies
evolve as the decentralized infrastructure of the technology
evolves. As progress is being made on scalability of decentralized
networks, use cases that necessitate higher degrees of throughput
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

become increasingly available and disrupt existing industries that
serve the same use cases with incumbent technology. Similarly, as
progress is being made on the security of decentralized networks,
if combined with higher degrees of scalability of those networks,
other and new use cases are becoming available and start to
disrupt industries with incumbent technologies.
The decentralization of network technology is limited because it
operates in an environment of centralized technology. The
internet, while in its foundation decentralized, has a centralized
order structure. Decentralized technologies use the centralized
evolution of the Internet and its technological infrastructure to
create decentralized system solutions. Such decentralized systems
exist and are confined by centralized technology of the internet
and the centralized societal structures it facilitates.
III. S-Curve of Centralization
The S-Curve of centralization provides society with tangential
temporary benefits. Centralization is effective for society and
business as long as it provides added benefits. In the initial phase
of expansion of centralization, the benefits of centralizing power,
capital, and control, rise faster than the cost of centralization.
Because the benefits of centralized power, such as cost savings
and efficiency, economies of scale and scope, rise faster, they
offset incremental downsides until the efficiency gains of
centralized systems expire. In the following decline phase, the cost
of centralization, e.g. corruption, rising prices, diseconomies of
scale, diminishing returns, cronyism, and other overreaches
increase. Because of the increase in the cost of centralization, the
benefits of centralization can no longer offset and outweigh the
cost. As a result, centralized systems function less optimally and
less efficiently.
The efficiency gains of centralization can perpetuate centralized
tendencies in society. Centralized efficiencies are very powerful
and create benefits for society and business. As new technologies
and new forms of human interaction materialize, centralized
design principles can again be applied and thrive until they
collapse in the next iteration. In the process, centralized design
principles are becoming deeply engrained in tech in societal
processes, business, and associated technology. In the process,
centralized design efficiencies become engrained in the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
infrastructure of society and create path dependencies that make
decentralized solutions incompatible.
The S-Curve of centralization undermines decentralized solutions.
Anthropologically, society evolved from somewhat decentralized
tribal structures into more centralized structures that facilitated
efficiency gains in urbanization and throughout the industrial
revolution. In the process, centralized infrastructure elements, such
as a legal system, financial services, among many others, became
deeply engrained in society. Despite the emergence of superior
decentralized technological solutions that have been emerging at
the beginning of the 21st century, the centralized elements in
business and society can be perpetuated via the efficiency gains in
the S-curve of centralization. The advent of decentralized
technology makes it not only technologically possible to create
decentralized solutions for society but is also anthropologically
necessary as centralized societal solutions have become outdated
and often unworkable.3 Yet, legacy systems can be optimized with
decentralized technology solutions that ultimately only perpetuate
centralized system structures. For example, the malfunctioning
proxy process for shareholders voting, where shareholder proxies
may accidentally approve a merger proposal,4 can be optimized
with blockchain technology. In the process, the outdated and
malfunctioning centralized legacy systems are being perpetuated
rather than being replaced with better performing decentralized
systems.
IV. Path Dependencies
Historical preference or use explains the continued use of a
practice or product. Path dependency occurs if less efficient and
beneficial means are used despite the availability of more efficient
alternatives because it may be operationally easier and, in the
short-term, more cost-effective to maintain along a preestablished
path.Institutions are notoriously path-dependent and change less
than rationally expectable and constrain advancement in the
process. Several factors help explain the existence of path
3 See further [___].
4 In re Appraisal of Dell Inc., CV 9322-VCL, 2015 WL 4313206 (Del. Ch. July
13, 2015), as revised (July 30, 2015).
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

dependencies. First and foremost, humans are boundedly rational,
subject to transaction cost, and opportunism.5 Human
policymakers make decisions based on their past experiences and
their assumptions based on such experiences. Cost implications
may lead to short-termism and reluctance to commit to long-term,
sustainable solutions for the common good. Similarly, initial
technology or design, concept, method, or innovation is often
adopted as a standard for a given industry, group, or part of
society, creating path dependence in its aftermath. Examples
include the industrial revolution, use of fossil fuels as primary
energy sources, analog systems, among many others.
The design of decentralized systems is subject to path
dependencies that originate from the centralized past. Humans’
past experience in centralized structures infiltrate and undermine
attempts to create more decentralized system. Any designer of any
type of system is subject to subconscious processes the designer
cannot change, channel, or influence. One aspect of the
subconscious is its exposure to centralized thinking and
philosophy in culture and during the human education and
socialization. Design of decentralized systems attempts is subject
to the totality of centralized human experience. As such,
decentralized system designs are not only subject to centralization
to enhance its features or deal with decentralized system
shortcomings, such as scaling and throughput, among others, but
also may incorporate unintentional methodologically centralized
design features. For example, centralization problems were
prevalent in blockchains at the beginning of the 2020s, whether
the system designers used Bitcoin’s Proof of Work consensus
algorithm or variations of Proof of Stake consensus algorithms,
such as BitShare’s Delegated Proof of Stake6 or Ethereum’s
Casper.7 In each of these cases, mining pools or block production
5 See [__]
6 Bitshares (n.d.). Delegated Proof of Stake (DPOS),
https://how.bitshares.works/en/master/technology/dpos.html.
7 Buterin, Vitalik (Aug 27, 2017). Incentives in Casper the Friendly Finality
Gadget. Etherum Foundation,
https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/casper-
economics/casper_economics_basic.pdf (accessed Dec. 7, 2017).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
cartels arose because lotteries, or voting delegations, or economy
of scale gave outsized rewards to powerful groups.
Unintentional methodologically centralized design features in
complex decentralized systems are inevitable. Complex systems
are systems that are subject to interactions between the system and
its respective environments or the systems’ own parts. Because of
the interactions and the associated morphing of the system,
complexity abounds and increases often exponentially because of
feedback loops, spontaneous order or the lack thereof, and
adaptation. Complex adaptive systems constantly evolve through
self-regulation of self-organizing group behaviors. By contrast,
while humans give undue credence to complex concepts,8 human
brains naturally simplify complex systems for the sake of
coherence. Therefore, it seems only natural that the designers of
decentralized systems will unintentionally use centralized design
features that increase coherence. Decentralized collaboration may
be able to overcome these natural human limitations.
Biomimicry for decentralized design optimization is subject to
limitations. Attempts to emulate nature’s decentralized design9 to
enhance the resilience of human-made systems are typically
disadvantaged ab initio as nature’s design is the result of millions
of years of design experimentation. Because of its history of
experimentation, nature’s decentralized design is meticulous until
proven otherwise. By contrast, human science is flawed until
proven otherwise.10 To emulate nature’s decentralized
experimentation design features, human designed decentralized
systems would need to build experimentation with workable
designs as a core feature into the system. At the beginning of the
2020s, very few decentralized systems or design proposals
incorporate such experimentation features.11 Even if human
8 FS Blog (n.d.). Complexity Bias: Why We Prefer Complicated to Simple.
FS.blog, https://fs.blog/2018/01/complexity-bias/.
9 See [____].
10 Taleb, Nassim Nichols (2012). Antifragile: Things That Gain from Disorder.
Random House Trade Paperbacks: New York, 349.
11 A noteworthy exception: Calcaterra, Craig & Kaal, Wulf A. (Jan. 18, 2018).
Secure Proof of Stake Protocol [Unpublished Working Paper No. 18-10],
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

designed decentralized systems incorporate experimentation
features at the design core, experimentation takes time. Truly
decentralized human design systems may take decades of
experimentation to iron out flaws and centralized impurities.
V. Constitutional Democracies
Constitutional democracies are the dominant form of organizing
society.12 In constitutional democracies, the government is limited
by a constitution. For example, in the United States, the
constitution is the supreme law of the United States of America,
originally comprising seven articles, delineating the national
framework of the government. The constitution delineates the
checks and balances for the distribution of power in the
government. The constitution controls the elected representatives
in the government and holds them accountable for their decisions
and actions while in public office. For example, the constitution
protects the rights of minorities. An elected representative in a
constitutional democracy cannot make decisions against a
minority group even if it benefits the ethnic majority that helped
elect the representative. The authority of the majority is limited by
legal and institutional means so that the rights of individuals and
minorities are respected.
Overreliance on the design of constitutional democracies limits
experimentation with decentralized solutions for the organization
of society. Because of the overwhelming success of constitutional
democracies around the world and their ability to bring peace and
equity to humanity, the model is widely seen as the only form of
organization that has a lasting role for humanity. Yet, the reliance
on a single legal document, the constitution, in combination with
widespread voter apathy has created limitations. The constitution
and the centralized structures established by the constitution can
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3125827 (accessed June 1,
2020).
12 Wikipedia, List of Countries by System of Government,
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_system_of_government
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
perhaps be adequately adjusted to unprecedented societal needs.
However, the exclusive reliance on constitutional principles for
the organization of society ignores and undermines the
opportunities created by decentralized forms of organization.
VI. Democratic Legitimacy of Code
“Developers will be at the center of
solving the world’s most pressing
challenges. However, the real power comes
when every developer can create together,
collaborate, share code and build on each
other’s work. In all walks of life, we see the
power of communities, and this is true for
software development and developers.”
Satya Nadella (CEO, Microsoft).13
Evolving decentralized systems are increasingly instantiated via
computer code. Code provides the fundamental architecture that
sets the terms of life in a digital age. The deep architecture of the
digital world cannot be fully understood unless one considers the
nature of code and how it operates. Code determines how to
protect personal information or how humans express themselves.
Code determines whether access to information is open or whether
specific information or space is zoned and siloed. Code affects
who sees what, or who or what is monitored. It determines how
machines communicate in the Internet of Things.14
13 Nadella, Satya (June. 4, 2018). Microsoft + GitHub = Empowering
Developers. Official Microsoft Blog,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2018/06/04/microsoft-github-empowering-
developers/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
14 TechTarget: IoT Agenda (n.d.) Internet of Things (IoT),
https://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/definition/Internet-of-Things-IoT
(accessed Aug. 28, 2018); Fried, Limor “Ladyada” (April 19, 2018) All the
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

“[The code] will present the greatest threat to
both liberal and libertarian ideals, as well as
their greatest promise. We can build, or
architect, or code cyberspace to protect
values that we believe are fundamental. Or we
can build, or architect, or code cyberspace to
allow those values to disappear. There is no
middle ground. There is no choice that does
not include some kind of building. Code is
never found; it is only ever made, and only
ever made by us.” Lessig (2006).15
Code is increasingly functioning as law. Through code, private
actors increasingly influence global (e)-commerce. Private actors’
coded legal arrangements create transnational rules and
regulations. For example, in the advent of the digital age, code has
progressively established itself as the predominant way to regulate
the behavior of Internet users and e-commerce. While code cannot
yet emulate the ambiguity and flexibility of legal rules and natural
language that can be interpreted by a machine, blockchain
technology and smart contracting enable code to assume an even
stronger role in coordinating and regulating people’s interactions
over the Internet.
Given the proliferation of code as law, the democratic legitimacy
of coded legal arrangements are increasingly called into question.
Through code, private actors have created governance tasks that
were traditionally the responsibility of democratically elected
sovereign states and state actors. Yet, the private coded legal
arrangements may violate democratically determined social justice
(Internet of) Things, Codecademy, https://www.codecademy.com/articles/all-
the-internet-of-things (accessed June 1, 2020).
15 Lessig, Lawrence (2006). Code. Basic Books: New York.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
objectives and imperfectly reflect the makeup and demographic
realities of modern societies. Arguably, the lacking democratic
legitimacy of code is not as much of a concern because coded
legal solutions are more restrictive than traditional law. Code
forces users to comply with its restrictions ex-ante. Users who
engage with a given coded platform or smart contract are
constrained by the coded environment from the beginning of the
relationship. Users cannot breach the technical coded rules, even
before they act. By contrast, traditional legal rules can only be
enforced ex-post, that is, after the predetermined rules have been
violated. While it is possible that global democracy can be
enhanced through private actors and their coordination of legal
arrangements via code, coded private governance may also
circumvent democratically legitimized governments. As such,
coded private regulation may compete with national and
international law. Thus, the democratic legitimacy of coded
private governance is an ongoing concern.
Decentralized systems can provide coded solutions that help
overcome the challenges presented by the lacking democratic
legitimacy of code. Such decentralized coded solutions provide an
incremental democratization process. For example, it is possible to
create a decentralized legal precedent system through weighted
directed acyclic graphs.16 With decentralized precedent comes
democratic legitimacy as the constituents who voted for the code
template, e.g. decentralized legal solutions etc., provide
democratic legitimacy in the respective voting pool. As the vote-
legitimized templates are increasingly used by others who
reference the earlier vote for the template, democratic legitimacy
increases incrementally through use as validation of the earlier
voting pool result. While these decentralized democratic solutions
are not the equivalent of centralized parliamentary democratic
legitimacy, they can be seen the early renderings of a
decentralized democratic society.
16 Calcaterra, Craig (May 24, 2018). On-Chain Governance of Decenralized
Autonomous Organizations: Blockchain Organization Using Semada
[Unpublished article],
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3188374 (accessed June 1,
2020).
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

VII. Territorial Integrity of Nation States
Conceptions of geographical borders for nation states undermine a
decentralized organization of society. Nation states and their
geographical borders were created by cultural homogeneity of a
given tribal structure and their need to distinguish and protect
themselves from other tribes. In decentralized forms of
organization tribal homogeneity is reorganized. That
reorganization may be incompatible with existing tribal structures
and their associated instantiations of government and geographical
constraints.
Experimentation with decentralized organizational forms of
society is curtailed by the principle of territorial integrity of nation
states. The territorial integrity of nation states is a foundational
principle of international law.17 It suggests that forced imposition
of a border change is an act that justifies war. Experimentation
with decentralized forms of societal organization are limited
because of the geographical constraints of the nation state and its
protection of its territorial integrity. Protection of its geographical
borders under the principle of territorial integrity of nation states
necessitates a continuous presence of modern national defense and
military. The presence and perceived threat of nation states’
military facilitates the ongoing division of natural resources and
production of products and services in a given nation state and the
exclusion of others in the distribution of such resources. Society is
less likely to experiment with decentralized forms of society if
nation states assert authority over natural resources.
Nation states undermine distributed value creation. As societies
find alternative means of production and distributed value
creation, nation states’ protection of national resources creates
obstacles in the expansion of distributed value creation.
Distributed value creation depends on the use of networked
intelligence and self-organization. As society moves from the
17 It is enshrined in Article 2(4) of the UN Charter and has been recognized as
customary international law.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
industrial age corporation with traditional hierarchies tasked with
the allocation of traditional physical and financial assets to
increasing self-organization and the creation and distribution of
decentralized critical resources via networked intelligence, the
value creation increasingly transcends the geographical constraints
of nation states. Nation states attempting to assert their sovereignty
and oversight over distributed value creation is likely to curtail
decentralized solutions for distributed value creation. Naturally,
governments will try to tax increasing distributed value creation if
they can assert national jurisdiction. Exercising this assumed
authority inhibits distributed value creation.
Decentralized value creation can effectively coexist with the
nation state. Practically, it is still difficult to imagine how society
could coordinate its critical resources and physical infrastructure
without a nation state and its functionalities and applications for
society. Simple coordination of law and order, physical
infrastructure, such as streets and sanitation, among others,
necessitate physically present centralized governance for the
foreseeable future. In fact, these practical constrains may
permanently undermine or significantly delay the comprehensive
decentralized coordination of societies’ resources and distributed
value creation. Accordingly, decentralized value creation is more
of a feature not a bug in the system that needs protection from the
nation state. The coexistence of decentralized value creation and
the nation states may ultimately be a question of degree and
coordination. In other words, the nation state could make
decentralized value creation a feature of its coordination function
for society.
VIII. Dogmatism
Increasing dogmatism of the 21st century undermines the
acceptance of decentralization. Society is faced with
unprecedented challenges as the complexity of the world increases
exponentially in the 21st century. For example, social welfare
systems collapse and call for alternative solutions that are not
afflicted by political dogma. Unfortunately, humans naturally
crave certainty in an environment of exponentially growing
complexity and associated uncertainty. As a result, humans often
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

favor dogmatic approaches that create certainty. Dogma or human
belief in an incontrovertible absolute truth often results in lacking
updates of perspectives on an area of a given reality. Political
dogma is formed by culture, socialization, education, and many
other factors. Dogmatic approaches to new problems are unlikely
to present the much-needed solutions. Groupthink and other forms
of dogma undermine society’s collective intelligence and
decentralized decision making.
Tools that facilitate output from humanity’s collective intelligence
and collective decentralized decision making are the most likely
candidates to help humanity overcome the core challenges of the
21st century. Without a broad and constantly changing set of tools,
humanity will attempt to solve new problems with existing design
metrics, which can have catastrophic consequences.18 Adequate
tools require constant updating and adjusting of human
assumptions, core believes, and their underlying evidence.
Constant examination and validation of new data to experiment
and update the underlying model and understanding of the world is
essential. As new information becomes available, in an effort to
take into account any validated new data, previous conclusions
about the world and its state of affairs have to be continuously
updated. Without constant questioning and corresponding
updating, existing tools will inevitably begin to warp and misshape
emerging data to force-fit its existing and previously functional
models.
Decentralized decision-making tools help transcend traditional
economic notions of capitalism and socialism. Conceptually,
decentralization uses elements of profit generation and
redistribution in a way that in effect combines capitalistic and
socialistic ideas. Decentralization allows for the organization of
society in economic structures that generate profits while at the
18 “To the man with only a hammer, every problem looks like a nail.” Munger,
Charlie (1994). A Lesson on Elementary Worldly Wisdom [Speech to USC
Business School], transcript available at https://fs.blog/great-talks/a-lesson-on-
worldly-wisdom/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
same time redistributing resources.19 Decentralized decision-
making tools facilitate self-organization and with it networked
intelligence that can grow organically and evolutionarily. As
society moves from the industrial age production in centralized
entities with traditional hierarchies tasked with the allocation of
traditional physical and financial assets to increasing self-
organization and the creation and distribution of critical resources
via networked intelligence, distributed value creation becomes
possible.
Widespread belief in centralized dogmatic approaches that can be
traced in principle back to notions of socialism and capitalism
remove the possibility of transcending those core notions.
Dogmatic notions can often be traced back to conflicting views on
socialism and capitalism. Human society and economic systems
have revolved around political doctrines for organizing society and
allocating resources for the last two centuries. First and foremost,
among those are the dichotomies of capitalism and socialism
which are seen by their proponents and their progeny as mutually
exclusive for the most part. Society is organized around those
notions and has formed power structures and political hierarchies
to serve and maintain these ideas.
IX. Regulation
In the early 2020s, government-controlled regulation of the
evolving digital asset space was perhaps the leading
decentralization neutralizer. The Securities and Exchange
Commission, among other regulatory agencies in the United
States, concerned themselves with attempts to fit decentralized
technology solutions and their digital assets into the existing
regulatory infrastructure. Carve-outs and safe harbors were
discussed but not seriously considered. The emphasis of regulatory
initiatives in the 2020s was on securities tokens and legal ways to
trade such tokens in the then existing securities law infrastructure.
Government control of the industry was an indispensable aspect of
the legal initiatives. Yet, decentralized technology solutions, at
19 See further [___].
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

their core, negate external control, censorship, and oversight.
Accordingly, the then-proposed approaches largely undermined
the decentralized technology evolution. Without the ability to
experiment in a legally protected environment, decentralized
products and technology could not evolve. Consumer protection
rightly trumped decentralized product experimentation in the early
2020s. Regulatory arbitrage provided some space to grow for the
then emerging decentralized products.
In the early 2020s, decentralized legal infrastructure solutions
were almost entirely missing. The incompatibility of decentralized
technologies with the then-existing regulatory frameworks would
have suggested that decentralized legal infrastructure solutions
would have flourished. Yet, other important decentralized
infrastructure products, such as a functional public blockchain
were still missing which undermined decentralized infrastructure
solutions. While some startups had been experimenting with ERC-
20 tokens and forms of decentralized arbitration, such solutions
lacked sufficient scale, decentralization, anonymity, and
autonomy.
The regulatory infrastructure solutions for decentralized products
and technology of the early 2020s followed largely the
characteristics of the product issuers. Tokens issued by
government entities (government coins) were compliant with and
followed the legal environment established by the issuing
government. Similarly, tokens issued by corporations in a given
jurisdiction (corporate coins), were compliant with the legal
guidance available at the time of their issuance in the given
jurisdiction. More decentralized products and technology solutions
typically did not fit into such regulatory solutions in a given
jurisdiction. As a result, the more decentralized products that were
more censorship resistant, autonomous, and could not be
controlled by regulatory agencies, were largely left in a regulatory
vacuum that limited their expansion, reach, and evolution.
The regulation of government coins versus corporate coins versus
people coins bifurcated the regulatory infrastructure for
decentralized technologies. Government coins and corporate coins
were able to develop and evolve with regulatory oversight.
Governments, such as the People Republic of China, were able to
promote the use of the technology through the tokens they
sponsored and force users and merchants in their jurisdiction to
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
embrace the technology. The government sponsored use of the
technology, through government coins and corporate coins, also
enabled a flourishing ecosystem that evolved around the
government-sponsored decentralized technology solutions. In the
case of corporate coins, just as in other industries like the oil and
gas industry, corporate influences supported and enabled
regulatory approaches and solutions they could comply with,
support, and control. Such corporate-driven legal solutions
operated at the expense of decentralized products and technology
with higher levels of decentralized solutions that were not
compliant with the centralized legal infrastructure for the
cryptocurrency and blockchain industry. People coins and the
innovations they created were largely subject to regulatory
uncertainty and evolved much slower or not at all. As a result,
evolving government coins and corporate coins created their own
path dependencies and engrained product deficiencies with
suboptimal levels of decentralization.
X. Centralized Algorithmic Automation
Centralized algorithmic automation poses perhaps the greatest
threat to decentralization. Centralized algorithmic automation
describes the process of artificially intelligent systems taking over
core functions in human society. The increasing availability of
data and predictive analytics is likely to cause humans to consult
centrally organized information in decision making. In the 2020s,
algorithms that analyze big data from sensors, IoT devices, big
data, and humans started to provide unprecedented guidance to
humanity. For example, sensors in medical devices, wearables,
and even the basic mobile phone provided more and more data on
human health and personal preferences, enabling humans to alter
their habits, diet, and daily routines to improve health and live a
more productive life.20 Big data analytics using a variety of data
sources including in social media preferences were able to reliably
20 Dormehl, Luke (2015). The Forumla: How Algorithms Solve All Our
Problems…and Create More. WH Allen: London.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

predict an individual’s preferences to a degree that significantly
outcompeted the individuals’ peers and even spouses.21
Individual choice, free will, and diversity of human experiences
and actions are increasingly limited through the availability of big
data and algorithmic data analytics. For example, the more DNA
analytics are available, the less people with make decisions that
contradict the analytics. Human survivability and long-term health
will determine their choices based on the available DNA analytics.
This was powerfully illustrated by Angelina Jolie’s decision in
2013 to undergo a double mastectomy after her DNA analytics
confirmed that she was carrying a mutation of the BRCAi gene
which is associated with an almost ninety percent probability of
developing breast cancer.22 Similarly, knowing oneself well
enough to make important life choices that enhance happiness,
such as selecting a life partner or picking up a particular
profession, used to involve an individual’s experimentation with
different preferences, meditation, philosophy, or even
psychoanalysis, personality tests, assessments centers, among
others. By contrast, big data analytics can help to quantify the self
and facilitate self-knowledge through numbers as the self is
arguably the totality of mathematical patterns that are otherwise
too complex for humans to understand.23 Humans will
increasingly see themselves as the amalgamation of biochemical
systems. Individuality, as defined in the early 2020s, will morph
into an individual’s understanding of the statistical significance of
biochemical signals in a given setting or environment, not a
humans’ inherent personality. Because the outcomes generated by
predictive algorithmic analytics are so superior and avoid the
catastrophic consequences of bounded human rationality, self-
delusion, and self-deception, humanity is bound to embrace
predictive analytics of the self wholeheartedly over time. Rational
21 Youyou, Wu, Kosinki, Michal, & Stillwell, David (2015). Computer-Based
Personality Judgements Are More Accurate Than Those Made by Humans,
PNAS 112:4 (2015), 1036-40.
22 Jolie, Angelina (May 14, 2013). My Medical Choice. New York Times,
A.25.
23 Quantified Self, https://quantifiedself.com/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
human choice facilitated by predictive human analytics
categorizes human experience and choice into a limited range.
Centralized algorithmic automation also has an equity aspect that
affects society. Centralized algorithmic automation cements the
existing socio-economic status of humans and class in the societal
order. As predictive algorithmic applications proliferate in society,
the elites will have enhanced access and control over their data
and predictive analytics. This will enable the elites to make better
choices than less well-off citizens. As humans become
increasingly the totality of their respective data and data streams,
the systems that organize human generated data improve outcomes
for their human users. For example, a health data monitoring
system used by a human may screen bio markers in real time and
provide recommendations to its users. The system may observe
high blood pressure and elevated cortisol and dopamine levels of a
user in a meeting and may triangulate that data with the same data
from previous meetings and predict accuracy of decision making
in the meeting. If the new biofeedback suggests a higher
likelihood of suboptimal decision making, the user can decide to
terminate the meeting and collect more information to make a
better decision later. Human users who have access to such
systems will make better decisions than users who have no access.
The better a system is in analyzing user preferences and
interacting with other systems and making choices for users, the
better positioned the user is in society.
Avatars are another good example to illustrate the possible
inequities. Users who upload all their personal data, including
personal preferences, health records etc. to an algorithmic
organizers that optimizes outcomes for its users can create an
avatar of themselves. It is conceivable that the algorithmic
organizers of such avatar users will, over time, connect with other
users’ algorithmic organizers, even without the knowledge of their
users, to examine optimization of outcomes for their respective
users. The better the avatar of a given user is and the better the
algorithmic organizer of that avatar is, the better the outcomes for
the respective user in real life. For example, employers may
review the avatar of a user rather than a resume. Assuming that
existing wealth remains a predictor of outcomes, the elites are
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

more likely to have the best organized avatars with the best
outcomes.
Increasing inequality among humans can also result from
centralized algorithmic decision making. As certain data driven
applications are becoming increasingly prevalent and used by
humans, such applications can become the equivalent of a
sovereign as any changes the application makes affects all citizens
using the application. For example, a heavily used application
such as Google may start to make disparate recommendations to
similarly situated users, thus benefiting one user group with better
predictions and outcomes over another user group.
Feedback effects between human knowledge and human use of
data and algorithmic utilization of that human input and
optimization for further input call into question the role of humans
at large. For example, an algorithm that watches human inputs and
the biometrics of human interaction with content can create
feedback effects for human consumption of content, creating ever
more data for analysis and extrapolation. At the same time, the
algorithm can triangulate with big data and real-time data from
other users interacting with the same content. As it is learning and
applying the human interaction and collective examination of the
content, the algorithm can extrapolate the collective human
psyche, awareness, and collective consciousness over time and in
real-time. More concretely, future algorithms can observe Kindle
readers when and how they interact with a certain text passage.
The algorithm can observe how and what happens to humans’
hormonal levels, pupil movements, etc. and provide feedback to
the reader and the collective on its uses and thoughts regarding the
text passage. In other words, the algorithm can analyze,
triangulate, and predict users’ collective interaction with
knowledge and associated decision making. In essence, the
technology can not only predict an individual’s interaction with
ideas, knowledge, wisdom, science etc. but also analyzes,
internalizes, and predicts the collective human experience and all
of humanity’s prevailing future that pertains to such content.
Given these superior analytical and predictive skills, data and
algorithmic oracles may in fact turn into a sovereign. Democratic
processes as they exist in the early 2020s may no longer be
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
necessary as the algorithmic solutions may become universally
accepted as superior for the greater good of humanity. For
example, centralized algorithmic automation can remove human
choice in democratic institutions. Democratic elections may not be
needed in an environment of centralized algorithmic automation.
Because big data and algorithmic data analytics enable centralized
algorithmically automated systems (such as Google, Facebook,
and Amazon) to know individuals’ political preferences better than
the individual’s themselves, exercising political will by way of
human voting is redundant. Of course, that vision conflicts with
the existing constitutional legal arrangements which may delay
such outcomes. Yet, the big data and algorithmic data analytics-
driven election choice removes humans’ bounded rationality24
may therefore more accurately, and arguably fairer, represent the
totality of a given constituents’ political will.
The above-mentioned effects of centralized algorithmic
automation have the potential to undermine the evolution of
decentralized systems. While decentralization offers defense
systems against the effects of centralized algorithmic
automation,25 its evolution and societal acceptance may be
threatened by the effects of centralized algorithmic automation,
big data, and dataism. Centralized algorithmic automation enables
a form of abdication of personal responsibility for individuals and
society at large. Furthermore, society may get used to the
conveniences, certainty, and guidance offered by centralized
algorithmic automation. As a result, path dependencies may set in
that undermine more innovative, secure, and equitable solutions
offered by decentralized systems. An algorithmic future where
most of humans’ decisions are predicted and or performed by
algorithms creates a threat for human individuality. The lack of
diversity of human experiences and lacking unpredictability create
a threat to diversity of nodes in decentralized systems. While
24 Kahneman’s cold water experiments suggest that humans listen to a narrating
self in political decision making, follow a peak-end rule, forget the vast
majority of political events during a given legislation period, focus exclusively
on a few extreme outlier events, and give largely disproportionate weight in
political decision making to the most recent events. See [___] 4, footnote 11.
25 See further [___], Part [___].
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

centralized algorithmic automation undermines equity,
individualism, individual choice, free will, and diversity of human
experiences, decentralized systems thrive when those conditions
are protected and proliferate. The freer and more equal humans are
and the more access they have to information and data the better
for decentralized systems. Societal outcomes can be optimized
through the efficient decentralized coordination of human inputs.
The possible effects of centralized algorithmic automation and
control can perhaps best be illustrated by cases of centralized
algorithmic control over uniquely human experiences. For
example, in the not too distant future it may be possible to upload
one’s brain to permanently exist in the cloud of computing
systems.26 In 2020, an American startup called Nectome claimed
that through a process called vitrivixation, it is possible to preserve
the external and internal structure of human brains.27 If Nectome
should find ways to upload their instantiation of a human brain to
the cloud and revive it, it would theoretically be possible to
26 Pinkstone, Joe (Feb. 19, 2018). Could You Live Forever? Humans Will
Achieve Immortality Using AI and Genetic Engineering by 2050, Expert
Claims. DailyMail.com, https://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-
5408425/Human-beings-achieve-immortality-
2050.html?fbclid=IwAR2NEKgeZMOlyAYoB3_NxQG4HftNTPsAtwFvCA9P
glhHp7WjAbn759bqkF4 (accessed June 1, 2020).
27 Bohl, Micahel A., Martirosyan, Nikolay L., Killeen, Zachary W., Belykh,
Evgenii, Zabramski, Joseph M., Spetzler, Robert F., Preul, Mark C. (March
2019). The History of Therapeutic Hypothermia and Its Use in Neurosurgery.
Journal of Neurosurgery, 130, 1006-1020; Mizrahi, Eli M., Patel, Vasishta M.,
Crawfor, E. Stanley, Coselli, Joseph S., Hess, Kenneth R. (1989).
Hypothermic-induced Electrocerebral Silence, Prolonged Circulatory Arrest,
and Cerebral Protection During Cardiovascular Surgery.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 72:1, 81-85; Percy,
Andrew, Widman, Shannon, Rizzo, Joahn A., Tranquilli, Maryann, Elefteriades,
John A. (2009). Deep Hypothermic Circulatory Arrest in Patients with High
Cognitive Needs: Full Preservation of Cognitive Abilities. The Annals of
Thoraciic Surgery, 87:1, 117-123; Raichle, Marcus, E. (1983). The
Pathophsiology of Brain Ischemia. Annals of Neurology, 13:1, 2-10; Wu,
Xianren, Drabek, Tomas, Tisherman, Samuael A. (2007). Emergency
Preservation and Resuscitation with Profound Hypothermia, Oxygen, and
Glucose Allows Reliable Neurological Recovery after 3 h of Cardiac Arrest
from Rapid Exsanguination in Dogs. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism, 28:2, 302-311.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
maintain uniquely human characteristics in perpetuity. If the
control over a human brain is left to a centrally controlled server
that is owned by a technology company, the individuals who
uploaded their brain may forever be subject to the centralized
entity’s discretion, control, and guidance. If the centralized
technology companies’ business models of the early 2020s are a
guide, a human existence in cyberspace would likely be subject to
a subscription service and associated fees, requiring humans to pay
for server storage and maintenance. In effect, the identity of the
person would be encapsulated by the centralized server
parameters. It seems almost intuitive that most individuals who
wish to upload their identity, personality, and future thoughts in a
digital format would prefer a committee of peers, e.g. similarly
situated individuals who are connected in a network, to make
decisions on their future than any centralized power structure.
Decentralized DAO etc. networks provide that very possibility, if
not with regards to hardware requirements, at least with regards to
collective decision making and governance of such networks.
XI. Lack of Decentralized Governance Systems
Humanity has been debating governance designs since the
inception of human organization. Institutional design and
governance are a primary subject of study in law, ethics,
economics, political science, computer science, philosophy,
sociology, social psychology, cybernetics, control theory, among
others. Entire schools of thought, such as new institutional
economics evolved because of the insufficiency of governance
solutions. Common core denominators of existing problems in
governance design include the corruptive effects of existing
governance designs with fungible assets as well as the identity of
actors in governance designs. These factors, among many others,
contributed to the resulting inability to govern institutions
effectively.
Lacking decentralized governance solutions affect the application
of decentralized systems on multiple levels. First and foremost
among those are decentralized networks, the market for digital
assets, and decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs),
among others. Decentralized networks depend on dynamic
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

governance. As blockchains protocols evolve in a given market,
they require updates. The practice of hardforking, that was still
prevalent in the early 2020s, created significant economic loss for
such blockchains. Similarly, the evolution of the digital asset
market necessitates certainty for market participants. Without
standards and governance, certainty and the associated market
confidence cannot develop. At the beginning of the 2020s, basic
standards for the governance of digital assets were still missing.
As a result, the digital asset market stagnated and DeFi
(decentralized finance) remained in its infancy. Efforts to provide
more legal certainty through regulatory carve-outs28 were mostly
tentative and lacked sufficient regulatory support or voting
majorities in the regulatory agencies. DAO governance is a
particularly useful example that illustrates the effects of lacking
governance on the evolution of decentralized systems. At the
beginning of the 2020s, the then existing DAO governance design
structures failed to take into account the historical precedent on
governance. Most DAOs utilized centralized forms of master
nodes to institute blockchain protocol and DAO upgrades.
Blockchain governance in the early 2020s necessitated chain forks
with all their negative effects. The calibration of forks for protocol
upgrades was common practice in the early 2020s.29 While
sometimes forks were merely used to test a process or upgrade,30
forking was most often used to implement new characteristics for
digital asset or to create a fundamental protocol change.31 The
28 Partz, Helen (Feb. 6, 2020). SEC's Cryptomom Proposes Safe Harbor
Framework for Token Projects. Cointelegraph,
https://cointelegraph.com/news/secs-cryptomom-proposes-safe-harbor-
framework-for-token-
projects?fbclid=IwAR3lGU0aXyoXj0mgetDg2s1RrfFtmoGWyBhXFNqZjaD_
uwPzYSp8nXpWvvM.
29 Etherum (May 28, 2020). Develooper Resources,
https://ethereum.org/developers/ (accessed Feb 11, 2018).
30 (“An example of a hard fork that implemented a new feature is Monero.
Monero underwent a planned hard fork in January 2017, to introduced Ring
Confidential Transactions (RCT). RCT improved security as well as privacy for
Monero users”). Monero, https://www.getmonero.org/ (accessed Aug. 19, 2019).
31 In the early 2020s, forks could be distinguished into hard and softforks.
Generally speaking, forks result in previously uniform nodes that, after the fork,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
bifurcation of nodes in a given decentralized network can lead to
significant economic loss, errors, confusion, and bugs. For
example, the bifurcation of network nodes can result in the
reemergence of the double spend problem that the previous
network had overcome. Users running the pre-fork code consider
the post-fork code invalid, they cannot detect the spending on the
post-fork code. Correspondingly, cryptocurrencies spent in a post-
fork block could be spent again on a pre-fork block. Similarly,
fork-related changes in protocol parameters such as the block size
or the difficulty of the cryptographic puzzle can result in certain
blocks being accepted by the post-fork protocol but rejected by the
pre-fork versions of the protocol which may result in the loss of
funds. The economic loss associated with such parallel existence
can be quite significant. Finally, the fork that created Bitcoin
Cash32 illustrates the risk of contention and the associated social
and political turmoil post fork that necessitates blockchain
reorganization. Post Bitcoin Cash fork, the Bitcoin community
could not agree on the chain that provided the most survivable
protocol. As a result of contention, two blockchains, e.g. Bitcoin
and Bitcoin Cash compete in perpetuity with the resulting social
and economic loss for each chain.
DAO governance lacked proper incentive designs at the beginning
of the 2020s. Human nature and any effective machine derivates
of human engagements in institutional form require a duality of
incentives in order to overcome attempts of rational and
opportunistic internal and external constituents to game the
governance design of a given DAO. The duality of incentives
consists of a) incentives for actors to improve their own utility,
while at the same time 2) actors’ actions benefit the entirety of the
run a different protocol with different data than the newer version. A soft fork is
a backward compatible protocol upgrade. The soft fork creates a new more
restrictive protocol rule, e.g. block size limit was 1 MB and is changed by the
soft fork to 500 KB. Because it is more restrictive and not more expansive it is
backward compatible with the previous protocol rule. By contrast, the hard fork
creates a more expansive ruleset and is therefore not backward compatible. For
instance, the increase of the block size limit from 1MB per block to 2 MB per
block would not be backward compatible because the previous protocol limited
the block size to 1 MB.
32 BITCOINCASH, WWW.BITCOINCASH.COM (ACCESSED JUNE 1, 2020)
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

institution and its constituents for the long run. DAO designs at the
beginning of the 2020s did not effectively master this duality.
Moreover, then existing DAO designs did not effectively use non-
fungible assets to overcome corruptive elements. When fungible
assets are used as the dominant incentive design in the governance
of DAOs with identifiable actors, rational and opportunistic
internal constituents and external participants will typically
attempt to corrupt the governance design of the DAO for their own
gain. Similarly, the identity of actors in a DAO governance design
creates typically corruptive elements. Merit identifiers other than
individual identity remove the most corruptive influences. At the
beginning of the 2020s, no then-existing DAO design had
effectively designed and applied an anonymous merit identifier
with non-fungible decentralized assets.
On-chain voting mechanisms are still largely in their infancy in the
early 2020s. Most on-chain voting mechanisms and governance
designs mostly resemble a plutocracy. Suboptimal voting
outcomes in existing decentralized protocols were associated with
the then popular one-token-one-vote voting mechanisms. A one-
token-one-vote design allocates more power to token holders who
have a significant share of the total supply of a given token.
Majority token holders have more power than the rest of the token
holders combined. These structures reintroduce many of the
downsides and suboptimal incentive allocations of one-share-one
vote designs in legacy systems of the early 21st century.
XII. Decentralized Infrastructure Requirements
Decentralized infrastructure needs run deep. Emerging
decentralized technology is subject to multiple layers of
underdeveloped decentralized infrastructure. Even a fully
developed and instantiated infrastructure product in one area may
collapse without the supporting structures build by decentralized
infrastructure products in other, yet inevitably related, areas. The
interdependence of infrastructure development in complex
decentralized systems and structures is perhaps best illustrated by
the need for a truly decentralized public blockchain that is scalable
and fully secure. Without it, experimentation with workable
infrastructure products requires stand-alone, siloed approaches that
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
are doomed ab-initio as they can rarely interoperate with other
siloed infrastructure products. Interrelated infrastructure products
are the key for decentralized technology’s foundational and
transformative impact. Such interrelated decentralized
infrastructure requirements are comparable to the infrastructure
requirements that enabled electricity to take hold in business and
society. In light of such infrastructure requirements, emerging
decentralized technology is a foundational technology whose
transformational impact takes decades rather than years to have an
impact on society.
Usability is perhaps the most important decentralized technology
infrastructure requirement in the early 2020s. User cannot be
expected to have specialized technology knowledge. Rather, users
should be able to use decentralized technologies intuitively. Alas,
in the early 2020s, decentralized technologies required users to
know about their own security, self-custody of digital assets, and
overall system operations. Without graphic user interfaces that are
intuitive, decentralized systems may not be able to reach
mainstream consumer adoption. If users have to discern and
manage public and private keys to wallets, among other concerns,
it will be very difficult to educate the public sufficiently to
seamlessly adopt decentralized protocols in their daily life.
In the early 2020s core infrastructure products that had to be
developed included: (1) truly decentralized consensus combined
with higher levels of transaction throughput. Currently, the data
mining required to provide scarcity also slows creation so that
high speed transactions cannot be achieved for the foreseeable
future, (2) evolutionary governance designs for blockchains that
overcome the need for hardforking, (3) decentralized underwriting
protocols that enable democratized access to insurance, and (4)
verification protocols for smart contracting, among other
decentralized infrastructure needs, and (5) stable cryptocurrencies
that maintain their value and can be used by consumers in daily
transaction without the need to make an investment decision for
every transaction. In other words, if consumers are required to
consider the investment implications of using digital asset for a
consumer transaction, they are less likely to opt into digital assets
for consumer transactions.
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

Finally, a core requirement for the emerging decentralized
infrastructure of the early 2020s that is often overlooked by
technologists pertains to the need for a decentralized human
backstop in decentralized algorithmic systems. Without a
decentralized human backstop to code, the immutability of the
blockchain and its cryptographic security systems may not be able
to create truly transactional guarantees and trust between
principals and agents in the integrity of their contractual
relationship.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
Bibliography
Buterin, Vitalik & Weyl, Glen (May 21, 2018). Liberation
Through Radical Decentralization. Medium: Cryptocurrency,
https://medium.com/@VitalikButerin/liberation-through-
radical-decentralization-22fc4bedc2ac;
BitcoinCash, www.bitcoincash.com (accessed June 1, 2020)
Bitshares (n.d.). Delegated Proof of Stake (DPOS),
https://how.bitshares.works/en/master/technology/dpos.html.
Bohl, Micahel A., Martirosyan, Nikolay L., Killeen, Zachary W.,
Belykh, Evgenii, Zabramski, Joseph M., Spetzler, Robert F.,
Preul, Mark C. (March 2019). The History of Therapeutic
Hypothermia and Its Use in Neurosurgery. Journal of
Neurosurgery, 130, 1006-1020; ; ;
Bonneau, Joseph, Miller, Andrew, Clark, Jeremy, Narayanan,
Arvind, Kroll, Joshua A., & Felten, Edward W. (2015). SoK:
Resea rch Perspectives and Challenges for Bitcoin and
Cryptocurrencies, in 2015 IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7163021
Buterin, Vitalik (Aug 27, 2017). Incentives in Casper the Friendly
Finality Gadget. Etherum Foundation,
https://github.com/ethereum/research/blob/master/papers/caspe
r- economics/casper_economics_basic.pdf (accessed Dec. 7,
2017).
Calcaterra, Craig (May 24, 2018). On-Chain Governance of
Decenralized Autonomous Organizations: Blockchain
Organization Using Semada [Unpublished article],
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3188374
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Calcaterra, Craig & Kaal, Wulf A. (Jan. 18, 2018). Secure Proof
of Stake Protocol [Unpublished Working Paper No. 18-10],
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3125827
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Dormehl, Luke (2015). The Forumla: How Algorithms Solve All
Our Problems…and Create More. WH Allen: London.
Etherum (May 28, 2020). Develooper Resources,
https://ethereum.org/developers/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Fried, Limor “Ladyada” (April 19, 2018) All the (Internet of)
Things, Codecademy,
https://www.codecademy.com/articles/all-the-internet-of-
things (accessed June 1, 2020).
FS Blog (n.d.). Complexity Bias: Why We Prefer Complicated to
Simple. FS.blog, https://fs.blog/2018/01/complexity-bias/.
In re Appraisal of Dell Inc., CV 9322-VCL, 2015 WL 4313206
(Del. Ch. July 13, 2015), as revised (July 30, 2015).
Jolie, Angelina (May 14, 2013). My Medical Choice. New York
Times, A.25.
Kwon, Yujin, Liu, Jian, Kim, Minjeong, Song, Dawn, & Kim,
Yongdae (2019). Impossibility of Full Decentralization in
Permissionless Blockchains. Association for Computer
Machinery,
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

https://webee.technion.ac.il/people/ittay/aft19/aft19-
final31.pdf.
Lessig, Lawrence (2006). Code. Basic Books: New York.
Mizrahi, Eli M., Patel, Vasishta M., Crawfor, E. Stanley, Coselli,
Joseph S., Hess, Kenneth R. (1989). Hypothermic-induced
Electrocerebral Silence, Prolonged Circulatory Arrest, and
Cerebral Protection During Cardiovascular Surgery.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 72:1,
81-85
Monero, https://www.getmonero.org/ (accessed Aug. 19, 2019)
Munger, Charlie (1994). A Lesson on Elementary Worldly
Wisdom [Speech to USC Business School], transcript available
at https://fs.blog/great-talks/a-lesson-on-worldly-wisdom/
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Nadella, Satya (June. 4, 2018). Microsoft + GitHub =
Empowering Developers. Official Microsoft Blog,
https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2018/06/04/microsoft-github-
empowering-developers/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Partz, Helen (Feb. 6, 2020). SEC's Cryptomom Proposes Safe
Harbor Framework for Token Projects. Cointelegraph,
https://cointelegraph.com/news/secs-cryptomom-proposes-
safe-harbor-framework-for-token-
projects?fbclid=IwAR3lGU0aXyoXj0mgetDg2s1RrfFtmoGW
yBhXFNqZjaD_uwPzYSp8nXpWvvM.
Percy, Andrew, Widman, Shannon, Rizzo, Joahn A., Tranquilli,
Maryann, Elefteriades, John A. (2009). Deep Hypothermic
Circulatory Arrest in Patients with High Cognitive Needs: Full
Preservation of Cognitive Abilities. The Annals of Thoraciic
Surgery, 87:1, 117-123
Pinkstone, Joe (Feb. 19, 2018). Could You Live Forever? Humans
Will Achieve Immortality Using AI and Genetic Engineering
by 2050, Expert Claims. DailyMail.com,
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-
5408425/Human-beings-achieve-immortality-
2050.html?fbclid=IwAR2NEKgeZMOlyAYoB3_NxQG4HftN
TPsAtwFvCA9PglhHp7WjAbn759bqkF4 (accessed June 1,
2020).
Quantified Self, https://quantifiedself.com/ (accessed June 1,
2020).
Raichle, Marcus, E. (1983). The Pathophsiology of Brain
Ischemia. Annals of Neurology, 13:1, 2-10
Taleb, Nassim Nichols (2012). Antifragile: Things That Gain
from Disorder. Random House Trade Paperbacks: New York,
349.
TechTarget: IoT Agenda (n.d.) Internet of Things (IoT),
https://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/definition/Interne
t-of-Things-IoT (accessed Aug. 28, 2018);
Wikipedia, List of Countries by System of Government,
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_by_system_
of_government (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
Wu, Xianren, Drabek, Tomas, Tisherman, Samuael A. (2007).
Emergency Preservation and Resuscitation with Profound
Hypothermia, Oxygen, and Glucose Allows Reliable
Neurological Recovery after 3 h of Cardiac Arrest from Rapid
Exsanguination in Dogs. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow &
Metabolism, 28:2, 302-311.
Youyou, Wu, Kosinki, Michal, & Stillwell, David (2015).
Computer-Based Personality Judgements Are More Accurate
Than Those Made by Humans, PNAS 112:4 (2015), 1036-40.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

DECENTRALIZATION NEUTRALIZERS
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808873

