S L
CHOOL OF AW
Legal Studies Research Paper Series
A C P T
OMPARATIVE ERSPECTIVE ON HE
L T D
IMITATIONS OF HE UTY OF
O – A C L
VERSIGHT OMMENT ON ISA
F
AIRFAX
University of St. Thomas Law Journal (forthcoming 2013)
Wulf A. Kaal
Associate Professor of Law
University of St. Thomas School of Law
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 13-04
This paper can be downloaded without charge from
The Social Science Research Network electronic library at:
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2215283
A complete list of University of St. Thomas School of Law
Research Papers can be found at:
http://www.ssrn.com/link/st-thomas-legal-studies.html

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
A COMPARATIVE PERSPECTIVE ON THE LIMITATIONS OF THE DUTY OF OVERSIGHT – A
COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
BY
WULF A. KAAL *
* Associate Professor, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis). This short essay is a
comment on Professor Lisa Fairfax’s article “Managing Expectations – Does the Directors’ Duty to
Monitor Promise More than it Can Deliver”. The author would like to thank Professor Fairfax for her
support and feedback during the drafting and editing process. He would also like to thank his colleagues
Lyman Johnson and Brett McDonnell for their feedback and insightful comments on earlier drafts. The
author would also like to thank research librarian Valerie Aggerbeck for her assistance.
1

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
ABSTRACT
Professor Fairfax shows that the duty to monitor promises more than it can
actually deliver and offers false hope that enhancing directors’ oversight responsibilities
can improve corporate governance. The nearly insurmountable standard for liability in
oversight cases and its effect on signalling the expected standard of conduct could have
long-term implications for corporate law in the United States. This comment contrasts the
standard for liability in oversight cases in the United States with the liability standards in
other countries. After outlining why stable rules may not suffice to make directors’
oversight role more robust, the author provides some initial thoughts on how contractual
and quasi law forms of dynamic governance could help improve the duty of oversight.
2

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
In her article “Managing Expectations – Does the Directors’ Duty to Monitor
Promise More than it Can Deliver” Professor Lisa Fairfax evaluates the practical
limitations of the duty to monitor.1 Professor Fairfax’s point is as unmistakable as it is
insightful and provocative: The oversight doctrine offers false hope that enhancing
directors’ oversight responsibilities can improve corporate governance. This creates
expectations that directors cannot possibly fulfil. In effect, the duty to monitor promises
more than it can actually deliver.
Professor Fairfax points to the significance of the duty of oversight, especially in
the context of the credit crisis, and its role as “one of the primary causes of the financial
crisis.”2 Professor Fairfax underscores that the outcomes of the crises could have been
improved if directors had more rigorously exercised their duty of oversight. However, as
she points out, the doctrine of the duty of oversight “may be too immature and
incoherent.”3 Without a workable duty of oversight, corporate directors seeking to
comply with the oversight duty lack meaningful guidance as to the expected conduct.
Combined with an ever more complex and growing modern corporation, it may be
“impractical for directors to successfully engage in oversight.”4 Professor Fairfax argues
that, because directors serve part-time as outsiders, it may be unreasonable to expect
directors to have the knowledge, capacity, and expertise to “effectively monitor the
business affairs of large, and increasingly complex, corporations.”5 As a result, Professor
Fairfax concludes that attempts to enhance oversight may fail and an emphasis on
improving oversight as a means of enhancing corporate governance could be ill-advised.6
Professor Fairfax also notes that imposing liability on directors for oversight
breaches in the United States is near impossible.7 This point is well illustrated in In re
Citigroup Inc. Shareholder Derivative Litigation.8 According to the complaint, starting
in May 2005, “red flags” pertaining to Citigroup’s investments in real estate and credit
9
markets should have alerted the defendants. By disregarding these warning signs, the
defendants allegedly sacrificed the long-term viability of Citigroup for the sake short-
10
term profits. Shareholder plaintiffs alleged that the directors failed to properly disclose
the company’s exposure to subprime assets and that they breached their fiduciary duties
by failing to properly manage and monitor the risk that Citigroup faced concerning
11
problems in the subprime lending market. The Delaware Chancery Court found that the
duty to monitor for illegal conduct under the Caremark12 line of cases would not be
1 Lisa M. Fairfax, Managing Expectations – Does the Directors’ Duty to Monitor Promise More than it
Can Deliver?, [___]U. ST. THOMAS L.J. [___] (forthcoming 2013) (on file with author).
2 Id. at 1.
3 Id. at 2.
4 Id.
5 Id.
6Id.
7 Id.
8 In re Citigroup Inc. S’holder Derivative Litig., 964 A.2d 106 (Del. Ch. 2009).
9Id. at 114-15.
10Id. at 111.
11 Id.
12In re Caremark Int’l Inc. Derivative Litig., 698 A.2d 959 (Del. Ch. 1996) (expanding directors’ duty of
care to include a duty to monitor for illegal conduct).
3

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
13
extended to impose oversight liability for business risk. Accordingly, the Chancery
Court upheld the business judgment rule and its protection of directors’ business
decisions in the face of worldwide economic losses. According to the Delaware Chancery
court, directors’ incorrect evaluation of business risk and their inability to predict the
future did not violate directors’ duty of oversight. Losses alone were not sufficient to
hold directors personally liable for taking risks that lead to losses because risk is inherent
in maximizing shareholder value. However, oversight liability can be established if the
plaintiff showed that “the directors knew that they were not discharging their fiduciary
[duties] or that the directors demonstrated a conscious disregard for their
14
responsibilities . . .”
Most importantly, Professor Fairfax explains why, while Delaware law may
signal the most appropriate standard of conduct,15 Delaware’s signaling of expected
conduct is undermined if it imposes a near insurmountable standard for liability in cases
involving breaches of the duty of oversight.16 Supporting Professor Fairfax’s argument,
Professors Johnson & Garvis show in an empirical study that courts often provide very
specific language regarding the appropriate standard of conduct for directors.17 However,
their study highlights that lawyers do not sufficiently communicate to directors what
conduct is expected of them.18 Inadequately informed directors may underestimate their
personal liability exposure and engage in more risky behavior than is desirable for the
company itself.
A Comparative Perspective on the Duty to Monitor
Professor Fairfax makes important arguments suggesting that the duty of
oversight in the United States promises more than it can actually deliver. Especially the
nearly insurmountable standard for liability in oversight cases and its effect on signalling
the expected standard of conduct could have long-term implications for corporate law in
the United States. Other countries, however, have stricter liability standards.
For instance, Germany has taken a much stricter approach to cases involving a
breach of the duty of oversight. The German business judgment rule19 requires a
showing of the same elements as the American business judgment rule, including a
decision by management, for the benefit of the corporation, based on sufficient
information, and with no conflicts of interest.20 However, the application of the German
13See Stone v. Ritter, 911 A.2d 362, 369-70 (2006) (reaffirming the Caremark duties and describing the
duty of oversight for liability purposes as a facet of the duty of loyalty).
14In re Citigroup, 925 A.2d, at 123.
15 Fairfax, supra note 1, at 18, n.136.
16 Id.
17 Lyman P. Q. Johnson & Dennis Garvis, Are Corporate Officers Advised About Fiduciary Duties?. 64
BUS. LAW. 1105, 1110-11 (2009). See also Lyman Johnson, Counter-Narrative in Corporate Law: Saints
and Sinners, Apostles and Epistles, 2009 MICH. ST. L. REV. 847, 866 (2009) (stating that lawyers do not
sufficiently advise directors).
18 Id.
19 The German business judgment rule was introduced in 2005 as part of the Gesetz zur
Unternehmensintegrität und Modernisierung des Anfechtungsrechts (UMAG) and implemented in Section
93 (1)-(2) of the German Stock Corporation Act. See Aktiengesetz [AktG] [Stock Corporation Act], Sept.
6, 1965, BGBL. I at 1089, § 93(1)−(2) (Ger.).
20 Id.
4

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
business judgment rule is much less clear in an environment of increased systemic risk,
such as the recent credit crisis.21 After evaluating legal liability rules in the aftermath of
the financial crisis, German commentators (contrary to their counterparts in the United
States, German courts rely heavily on the expertise of commentators) concluded that
managers do not act reasonably in terms of the German business judgment rule if risks
22
taken on behalf of the corporation result in the demise of the corporation. In its
ARAG/Garmenbeck decision, Germany’s highest court in civil matters, the Federal Court
of Justice or Bundesgerichtshof (BGH), explained that if the “business risk was
inappropriately excessive,” directors’ business decisions are not protected under the
23
German business judgment rule. This holding is diametrically opposed to the holding
in In re Citigroup where the Delaware Chancery Court declared that directors’ incorrect
evaluation of business risk did not violate directors’ duty of oversight.24
In another case, In re Walt Disney Company Derivative Litigation (“Disney”),25
the Delaware Chancery court and Supreme Court both held that the directors were not
liable for awarding $130 million to Michael Ovitz for serving only one year as the
number two executive at Disney. Over the course of almost a decade, this litigation
spawned five published opinions by Delaware courts – two from the Delaware Supreme
Court and three from the Delaware Chancery Court.26 The Chancery court initially
viewed the payout to Michael Ovitz as an unremarkable exercise of business judgment.
On appeal, however, the Delaware Supreme Court opined that Disney’s disorderly board
processes and the size of the payout rendered the outcome on both the waste and process
claims a close case.27 Although the deficient pleading led the Delaware Supreme Court to
affirm the dismissal of plaintiffs’ claim, it advised the Chancery Court to grant the
plaintiffs leave to amend.
By contrast, the BGH’s decision in Mannesmann28 determined that the directors
of the German Mannesmann AG breached their fiduciary duty to the company by
awarding a bonus of approximately $17 million to the Mannesmann CEO whose tenure at
Mannesmann resulted in a substantial increase of shareholder value. In the 1990s,
Mannesmann’s CEO, Klaus Esser, successfully turned the company from a German
company with a focus on heavy machinery into an international conglomerate operating a
21 Wulf A. Kaal & Richard W. Painter, Initial Reflections on an Evolving Standard: Constraints on Risk
Taking by Directors and Officers in Germany and the United States, 40 SETON HALL L. REV. 1433 (2010).
22 Marcus Lutter, Die Business Judgment Rule und Ihre Praktische Anwendung, 18 ZEITSCHRIFT FÜR
WIRTSCHAFTSRECHT [ZIP] [J. BUS. L.] 841, 843–45 (2007) (Ger.); AktG at § 93(1)−(2) (providing the five
core elements of the German business judgment rule: (1) a business decision by management, (2) for the
benefit of the corporation, (3) no conflict of interest, (4) based on sufficient information, and (5) no
“hazard” decision or no excessive risk taking).
23 Bundesgerichtshof [BGH] [Federal Court of Justice] Apr. 21, 1997, NEUE JURISTISCHE WOCHENSCHRIFT
[NJW] 1997, 1926 (Ger.).
24 See supra note 8 and accompanying text.
25 906 A.2d 27 (Del. 2006), aff’g 907 A.2d 693 (Del. Ch. 2005).
26 See id. Three earlier published court opinions pertain to the same litigation: In re Walt Disney Co.
Derivative Litig., 731 A.2d 342 (Del. Ch. 1998) (dismissing complaint); Brehm v. Eisner, 746 A.2d 244
(Del. 2000) (affirming dismissal but granting Plaintiff leave to amend); In re Walt Disney Co. Derivative
Litig., 825 A.2d 275 (Del. Ch. 2003) (declining motion to dismiss amended complaint).
27 Brehm, 746 A.2d at 249.
28 Bundesgerichtshof [BGH] [Federal Court of Justice] Dec. 21, 2005, NEUE JURISTISCHE WOCHENSCHRIFT
[NJW] 2006, 522 (Ger.).
5

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
successful cell phone network. In November 1999, Esser successfully negotiated
Vodafone’s friendly takeover of Mannesmann. The final merger agreement valued
Mannesmann’s stock at 360 Euros per share. Compared to the initial offer, rejected by
Esser, the deal negotiated by Esser increased the value for Mannesmann stockholders by
more than Euros 63 billion. However, when Mannesmann’s compensation committee
awarded Esser a bonus of $17 million in recognition of his extraordinary
accomplishments, the German public and press reacted largely negatively. On March 7,
2000, an attorney representing smaller German companies filed criminal charges against
the members of Mannesmann’s compensation committee, among others, for breach of
trust (Untreue – Section 266 of the German Penal Code). Defendants agreed to pay Euros
5.8 million and the case was settled.
Comparative corporate law research is challenging and may include inaccuracies
as a result of countries’ different legal history, legal origins, and legal cultures.
Comparing Disney and Mannesmann is challenging and inexact but, like the comparison
between In re Citigroup and ARAG, it underscores the differences between Delaware and
German law regarding the allocation of liability. Both comparisons are based on cases
involving extreme facts, placing the cases at the cusp of culpable conduct, and both cases
take place in different contexts. Disney involves a termination under an employment
contract while Mannesmann addresses a gratuitous bonus. Despite the limitations and
inaccuracies in these comparisons, it seems difficult to escape the conclusion that had the
two American cases, In re Citigroup and Disney, been decided in Germany, the liability
allocation would have been different. German courts generally seem more willing to
second-guess directors’ decisions than Delaware courts. The different legal standards for
liability allocation in Germany and the United States illustrate their rather different legal
and societal attitudes towards managers’ risk-taking.
Lowering the standard for liability in oversight cases in the United States could
address several of the duty of oversight’s shortcomings described above. Delaware’s
signaling of expected conduct29 could be dramatically improved with a moderate standard
for liability in cases involving breaches of the duty of oversight. Directors and officers
would take their increased personal liability exposure into account and could be
incentivized to engage in less risky behavior. Arguably, the outcomes of the last financial
crisis could have been improved if directors had more rigorously exercised their duty of
oversight because of looming personal liability. With an increase in liability, courts
would also have an opportunity to clarify the oversight doctrine. The duty of oversight
29
Fairfax, supra note 1, at 18, n.136. See also Lyman Johnson, Debarring Faithless Corporate and
Religious Fiduciaries in Bankruptcy, 19 AM. BANKR. INST. L. REV. 523, 532, 538 (2011) (“Debarment
relief has the advantage of sanctioning misconduct while not depleting the financial resources of companies
themselves, whose investor and creditor constituencies may be unaware of and innocent of wrongdoing.
This is of particular importance if the misconduct created significant financial distress for the business
because government monetary penalties could crowd out private claimants. And, unlike the case with
money damages or civil penalties, bar orders are entirely forward looking and can pointedly seek to prevent
repeat behavior in a specified setting [….] The debarment remedy, moreover, does not visit money
damages per se on the wrongdoer, thereby blunting potential criticisms that it will dissuade persons from
serving in senior governance positions or lead to excessive risk averse behavior for fear of personal
monetary liability, and it does not penalize the company itself and thereby compete with private creditors
for limited organizational funds. Critically, it is forward looking and preventive in its orientation.”).
6

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
could, thus, evolve into a mature and coherent doctrine.30 With a workable duty of
oversight, corporate directors would be in a better position to obtain meaningful guidance
regarding the expected conduct. Indeed, the complexities of the ever-growing modern
corporation would perhaps need to be adjusted to facilitate directors’ successful
oversight.31
Increased liability is no panacea and cannot, alone adequately address the central
shortcomings of the duty of oversight and corporate governance in the United States that
Professor Fairfax identifies.32 Even if directors face heightened liability it would probably
still be unreasonable to expect directors to have the knowledge, capacity, and expertise to
“effectively monitor the business affairs of large, and increasingly complex,
corporations.”33 After all, directors serve part-time as outsiders.34 Moreover, cost
increases and path dependencies may make it nearly impossible to relax the close to
insurmountable standard for liability in oversight cases. This weighs in favour of
Professor Fairfax’s conclusion that attempts to enhance oversight in the United States
may fail and an emphasis on emphasizing improving oversight as a means of enhancing
corporate governance could be ill-advised.35
Dynamic Regulation
Professor Fairfax’s critique of the duty of oversight and the role of directors’ in
corporate governance implicates the broader corporate governance framework in the
United States.36 Since 2002, corporate governance in the United States has not just once
but twice been substantially upgraded after more than seventy years of comparative
regulatory inactivity.37 At the most general level, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act aimed to
increase board independence, fix the audit process, and improve disclosure and
transparency.38 Only eight years later, Congress again overhauled the corporate
30 Contra Fairfax, supra note 1, at 2 (discussing the incoherency and immaturity of the current doctrine of
oversight).
31 Contra id. (explaining the complexities of the modern corporation).
32 Id.
33 Id.
34 Id.
35 Id.
36 Id. (stating that directors serving part-time as outsiders “may make it unreasonable to expect that
directors have the capacity, knowledge, and expertise to effectively monitor the business affairs of large,
and increasingly complex, corporations.”).
37 Wulf A. Kaal, Zwangswandelanleihen als Dynamische Regulierung der Finanzmarktindustrie, in
FESTSCHRIFT KIRCHNER (Wulf Kaal, Andreas Schwartze, Matthias Schmidt & Ulrich Ehricke eds., 2013).
38 Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745 (2002); Roberta Romano, The
Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Making of Quack Corporate Governance, 114 YALE L.J. 1521 (2005)
(providing an evaluation of the substantive corporate governance mandates of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002); Stephen M. Bainbridge, CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AFTER THE FINANCIAL CRISIS (2012); Larry E.
Ribstein, Market vs. Regulatory Responses to Corporate Fraud: A Critique of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of
2002, 28 J. CORP. L. 1, 11-18 (2002) (reviewing some of the reforms in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and
discussing how these reforms purportedly respond to the problems discussed in the first part of the article);
Robert Charles Clark, Corporate Governance Changes in the Wake of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act: A Morality
Tale for Policy Makers Too, 22 GA. ST. U. L. REV. 251 (2005) ([This paper] “presents a synthetic overview
of the numerous reforms, which at the most general level aim to fix the audit process, increase board
independence, and improve disclosure and transparency.”); John C. Coates IV., The Goals and Promise of
7

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
governance regime in the Dodd-Frank Act.39 Although some may argue that the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) and the Dodd-Frank Act (Dodd-Frank) addressed different
regulatory concerns precipitated by different causes in different market environments and
different economic conditions, a noteworthy common denominator between SOX and
Dodd-Frank and other reform proposals is the use of a top down regulatory approach, i.e.
direct regulatory intervention with stable and supposedly optimal rules.
Governance adjustments via stable rules in reaction to a systemic shock can result
in suboptimal governance outcomes, market volatility, and economic loss. While a
comprehensive evaluation is beyond the scope of this comment, some initial observations
may include the following. Corporate governance reforms are often enacted as a response
to a particular lack of oversight that resulted in a crisis. Governance adjustments are often
enacted merely to address the then perceived problem in the given market environment
and in the then existing economic conditions, without regard to possible future
developments.40 Worse yet, following the enactment, governance adjustments are often
later repealed or diluted.41 Anticipation of future developments and pre-emption of
possible future crises does not play a significant role in the top down approach to
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 21 J. ECON. PERSP. 91 (2007) (“At its core, the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation was
designed to fix auditing of U.S. public companies, which is consistent with the official name of the law: the
Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act of 2002 […] Sarbanes-Oxley created a
unique, quasi-public institution to oversee and regulate auditing, the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (PCAOB).”); Bernhard Kuschnik, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act: “Big Brother Is Watching
You” or Adequate Measures of Corporate Governance Regulation?, 5 RUTGERS BUS. L.J. 64 (2008)
(reviewing SOX corporate governance provisions); J. Robert Brown, Criticizing the Critics: Sarbanes-
Oxley and Quack Corporate Governance, 90 MARQ. L. REV. 309 (2006) (“SOX, named after its putative
sponsors, sought to improve corporate disclosure by increasing the gatekeeper function of outside
accounting firms and heightening the supervisory role of top officers and the board.”); Paula J. Dalley,
Public Company Under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 28 OKLA. CITY U. L. REV. 185 (2003); Lawrence
E. Mitchell, The Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Reinvention of Corporate Governance?, 48 VILL. L. REV.
1189 (2003) (“The Act makes three specific changes in the way we think about corporate governance: first,
it brings into the realm of internal governance the gatekeepers that once stood outside the box, including
auditors, analysts and lawyers. Second, it significantly enhances the legal status of, and centrality of
corporate governance to, the chief executive officer and the audit committee, two constituents that have
received very little recognition in the law and its literature. Third, both in doing this and in other respects
(like the prohibition of loans to officers and certain other conflict of interest transactions), it federalizes an
important dimension of the internal laws of corporate governance, creating a new (albeit arguably narrow)
duty of care for the CEO and audit committee and reintroducing serious prohibitions on conflict of interest
transactions that have eroded to nothingness in the hands of the Delaware judiciary and legislature.”).
39 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203 §§ 951-956, 124
Stat. 1376, 1899-1903 (2010).
40 Lyman Johnson, Beyond the Inevitable and Inadequate Regulation of Bankers: A Comment on Painter, 8
U. ST. THOMAS L.J. 29 (2010) (“The pattern goes like this: a perceived problem, originating in the private
business realm, is thought to have sufficiently dire social consequences that some form of new regulation is
proposed. A predictable debate ensues as to whether regulation is needed at all and, if so, as to whether the
particular proposal is the right kind of regulation.”).
41 John C. Coffee, Jr., The Political Economy of Dodd-Frank: Why Financial Reform Tends to be
Frustrated and Systemic Risk Perpetuated, 97 CORNELL L. REV. 1019, 1076-78 (2012).
8

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
regulation.42 However, the economic conditions and the corresponding requirements for
optimal and stable rules are constantly evolving. Financial innovation, the globalization
of markets, transnationalism, ethical challenges, and the bounded rationality of humans,
among many other factors, are likely to create and perhaps increase future challenges that
may require additional and perhaps more extensive governance adjustments.
The shortcomings of stable rules, especially the perpetual need for rule enactment
and revision, could justify a supplemental dynamic approach to regulating the financial
industry.43 Dynamic regulation would not replace the established regulatory framework
but could enhance and extend it.44 While a detailed evaluation and justification for this
regulatory approach is beyond the scope of this comment,45 Dynamic Regulation as a
regulatory approach may be summarized with several core elements: 1.) Dynamic
Regulation suggests an adapting governance mechanism that is constantly evolving and
adjusting to the given market environment, financial innovation, and the given regulatory
environment; 2.) Dynamic Regulation may help avoid the regulatory sine curve46 and its
negative and costly consequences; 3.) Dynamic Regulation could provide a self –
enforcement mechanism, independent from the existing regulatory structure and agency
enforcement; 4.) Dynamic Regulation may enable regulators to anticipate future changes
and challenges and adapt stable rules accordingly.47
A dynamic approach could be worth exploring in the context of Professor
Fairfax’s critique of the duty of oversight and the role of directors’ in corporate
governance. As Professor Fairfax points out, directors are outsiders working part time
and the increasing complexities of modern corporations could make it unreasonable to
expect directors to comply with increased oversight responsibilities.48 Using court
decisions and stable rules to make “the oversight role more robust to ensure that directors
pay greater attention to their monitoring responsibilities”49 could be insufficient. By
contrast, contractual and quasi law forms of dynamic governance could help improve the
duty of oversight. Corporate Integrity Agreements (CIAs), for instance, could be one
form of dynamic governance that may be able to temporarily increase fiduciary duties as
a form of quasi law.50 CIAs may be seen as an adapting governance mechanism that is
constantly evolving and adjusting to the specific ethical challenges of the respective
42 See Ronald J. Gilson & Reinier Kraakman, Market Efficiency after the Financial Crisis: It’s Still a
Matter of Information Costs 48 (2012), available at
http://www.law.umn.edu/uploads/12/d7/12d77c902205da28b32a345e4497654e/CLEAN-EMCH-4-1-12-2-
2-Kraakman.pdf (arguing that legal rules are not intended to anticipate earthquakes in the financial
industry); Ronald J. Gilson & Reinier Kraakman, Market Efficiency After the Fall: Where Do We Stand
Following the Financial Crisis, in RESEARCH HANDBOOK ON THE ECONOMICS OF CORPORATE LAW 456
(Claire A. Hill & Brett H. McDonnell, eds., 2012).
43 Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, 49 WAKE FOREST L. REV. (2013)
(forthcoming).
44 Id.
45 See id.
46 Coffee, supra note 41, at 1029.
47 Kaal, supra note 43.
48 Fairfax, supra note 1, at 2.
49 Id.
50 Wulf A. Kaal & Elizabeth R. Malay, Corporate Integrity Agreements as Quasi Fiduciary Duties, (on file
with author) (arguing that corporate integrity agreements could increase fiduciary duties as quasi law).
9

A COMMENT ON LISA FAIRFAX
corporations.51 A more in-depth evaluation of dynamic approaches and their potential for
corporate governance improvements is beyond the scope of this comment. More research
may be needed to understand how dynamic forms of governance could help improve
fiduciary duties and corporate governance.
51 Id.
10

