REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
–
How DAOs Optimize Finance
Wulf Kaal1
Abstract
Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs) have the
potential to upgrade finance. This paper evaluates the design of and
system requirements for a decentralized cryptocurrency venture
capital investment club that is operating as a DAO (DAOIC). The
design of the proposed DAOIC enables investors to substitute
capital commitments by way of reputation token staking on
proposed portfolio companies. The proposed design has the
potential to lower capital requirements and free up liquidity for
decentralized smart contract coordinated investment vehicles.
Key Words: Decentralized Autonomous Organization, Venture
Capital, Reputation, Non-Fungible Tokens, Fungible Tokens,
Capital, Venture Funding, Finance, Token Models,
Cryptocurrencies, Feedback Effects, Emerging Technology,
Tokens, Blockchain, Distributed Ledger Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
1 Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law, Minneapolis. The
author is grateful for many discussions with Craig Calcaterra & Kaal on the
uses of reputation systems for the evolution of decentralized governance and
DAOs.
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

Executive Summary
● Reputation Replaces Capital: Instead of capital
commitments, DAOIC members stake RNFTs on deals
● Return Amplification - the fungible reputation token may
be valued by the market as:
○ 1.) a tokenized instantiation of the collective wisdom
of the DAOIC members
○ 2.) a representation of the total ROP on each deal
upvoted by DAOIC members via RNFT
● Risk Mitigation:
○ 1.) collective wisdom of DAOIC members hedges
against purchase risk
○ 2.) RNFT staking removes counterparty risk
○ 3.) fungible reputation tokens are liquid assets in
secondary market
○ 4.) incentive design ensures consent in RNFT
staking which removes risk of loss
● Liquidity:
○ 1.) removal of capital gives the DAOIC members a
permanent option on deals
○ 2.) no capital calls etc. improves liquidity
○ 3.) public secondary market ensures liquidity in
fungible reputation token
● Ratio Adjustments:
○ 1.) provide a key tool for strategic increases in
profitability
○ 2.) enable strategic tradeoffs
○ 3.) coordinate overall DAOIC policy
○ 4.) are subject to DAOIC member vote via RNFT
staking
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 3
II. BASIC CONCEPT .................................................................................... 4
1. Reputation Replaces Capital ............................................................ 4
2. Liquidity ........................................................................................... 5
3. Risk Optimization ............................................................................. 9
4. Decentralized Underwriting .......................................................... 12
III. TOY MODEL ................................................................................... 15
1. Phase 1 - Priming the Pump .......................................................... 17
2. Phase 2 - Capital Allocation .......................................................... 19
3. Phase 3 - Reputation Building ....................................................... 22
4. Phase 4 - Reputation as Capital .................................................... 23
5. Phase 5 – Growth Through Market Evolution ................................ 24
IV. POLICY CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................... 25
1. Standard Setting ............................................................................. 25
2. Accountability ................................................................................ 27
3. Market Power ................................................................................ 28
4. Decentralized Coordination ........................................................... 30
V. GOVERNANCE ADJUSTMENTS .............................................................. 31
1. Minting Ratio of Capital Commitment to RNFT ............................ 31
2. Ratio of Capital Commitment to RNFT Staking ............................. 31
3. Minting Ratio of ROP to Fungible Reputation Token .................... 32
4. Ratio of Market to DAOIC Capital Commitments ......................... 32
5. Minting Ratio of Market Purchases to Fungible Reputation Tokens
33
VI. CONCLUSION .................................................................................. 33
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

I. Introduction
Decentralized investment designs have significant advantages over
traditional finance. The need for capital is taken as a basic
requirement of traditional finance. All investment decisions
revolve, on some level, around the existence of investment capital.
Derivatives and margin trading, among other financial designs in
legacy finance, provided a first step towards the removal of capital
in financial transactions. Decentralized systems can take the
removal of investment capital from deals to the next level.
In the existing markets, decentralized investment solutions and
associated vehicles are subject to significant downsides that make
them less competitive than traditional financial investment
solutions. Primary among the downsides is the legal uncertainty that
is typically affecting decentralized investments and investment
platforms. Legal solutions for decentralized funding vehicles are
naturally evolving with a delay after innovative new funding
vehicles emerged.2
Decentralized markets are overcollateralized, giving traditional
markets a fundamental advantage. To enable a decentralized
financial transaction, such as a loan or insurance policy,
decentralized products typically need to be backed with 100%
collateral. In the case of secondary layers, such MakerDAO, 200%
collateralization is required. This would be an unthinkable obstacle
to liquidity in traditional markets. However, in digital asset markets
the lack of alternatives mandates such levels of collateralization.
With the evolution of decentralized infrastructure, decentralized
investment designs are increasingly equipped to outperform
2 The design proposed herein is technologically possible in 2021. The author
recognizes that many jurisdictions will treat the design proposed herein less
favorably. However, the author takes not position on legal issues and possible
solutions in any jurisdiction that may be associated with the design proposed in
this article. Legal solutions are under development in many jurisdictions in 2021.
In the United States, the Wyoming DAO is only one example that provides a
temporary legal solution that is subject to experimentation. The author believes
that legal designs will develop lockstep with a time delay to decentralized DAO
governance in finance.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
traditional finance. For example, once secure and meaningful
reputation is incorporated into the Web3 environment, the
imbalance between decentralized and traditional finance can be
reversed. Reputation tokens that are utilized in decentralized
finance are more meaningful than traditional identity verification
metrics, and much easier to value. Accordingly, decentralized
protocols that use reputation metrics will require less
collateralization than in traditional protocols. Given these
advantages, the decentralized economy that will be powered by new
and innovative designs, such as the one proposed herein, are likely
to be more competitive and may eventually gain the upper hand over
traditional centralized financial institutions. For example, locking
users reputation tokens instead of your fungible assets would be a
strong leap in efficiency, giving a powerful economic advantage
over traditional finance. This requires a coherent system which
securely tracks the value of a reputation token.
II. Basic Concept
1. Reputation Replaces Capital
The basic concept introduced in this article revolves around the core
mantra of “reputation as capital.” In essence, once meaningful
decentralized reputation is established, reputation can be used to
remove the need for capital base and/or capital requirements. In the
DAOIC model, the members of the DAOIC wean off the need for
capital in order to participate in DAOIC deals. Instead of capital
commitments, DAOIC members stake RNFTs on newly proposed
incoming deals. The public market funds the DAOIC approved
deals and the DAOIC members get paid via the 20% public ROP
minting to fungible reputation token.
If members still wish to commit capital on particular deals they can
get into deals on the public market side, based on the same
conditions. But, they would in essence be paying themselves with
the 20% of ROP.
Because DAOIC members are sharing in the ROP of the market
with 20%, which may be much more in the aggregate than the
individual DAOIC members’ ROP, the model amplifies the DAOIC
member returns. DAOIC members get paid in fungible reputation
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

tokens. The long-term effect here is that the market replaces the
need for capital commitments by DAOIC members. The members
still continue to benefit from their staking work without the need to
contribute capital. Over time, the reputation effect grows and the
uncoupling from capital increases.
Not only are members sharing in the ROP of the market with 20%,
which may be much more in the aggregate than the individual
DAOIC members’ ROP, the model also amplifies the DAOIC
member returns because only DAOIC members get paid in fungible
reputation tokens. Public investors get paid their 80% ROP via DAI
pro rata.
Such tokens are themselves a significant value proposition because
the fungible reputation token is based on the deal pipeline upvoted
by DAOIC members via RNFT. The fungible reputation token is:
1.) a tokenized instantiation of the collective wisdom of the DAOIC
members, which may be valued by the market as such, and
2.) a representation of the total ROP (100% DAOIC Member ROP
PLUS 20% Public ROP) on each deal upvoted by DAOIC members
via RNFT.
The combined effect of these factors will likely cause the public
perception and corresponding market valuation of the fungible
reputation tokens to be favorable.
2. Liquidity
The most efficient and most liquid markets display high levels of
transaction rates of highly diverse goods exchanging between a
multiplicity of small market participants. This market
decentralization is most efficient and provides the most reliable and
accurate (price) information, which, in turn, enables the highest
levels of truth discovery in the market.
The basic mantra of reputation as capital is that it makes business
more efficient and more liquid as it frees resources for further use.
Reputation frees up capital. As capital is replaced by reputation it
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
no longer has to be tied to a given asset. Reputation is encumbered
and tied to an asset instead of capital. The more reputation replaces
capital the less capital has to be allocated, tied, and encumbered. In
turn, the ratio of capital becoming unencumbered through
reputation increases the deployment of capital ratio, e.g. a higher
proportion of unencumbered capital can be newly encumbered.
Therefore, reputation increases the degree, speed, and overall
ability of an individual or firm to purchase or sell an asset. In turn,
reputation increases the availability of liquid assets to a company or
market.
The liquidity function of reputation as capital can theoretically be
extended to tokenized assets. Reputation can be used to underwrite
tokenized assets and provide immutable guarantees for tokenized
assets. With reputation staked guarantees on tokenized assets such
tokenized assets can, over time, exist like real assets. Reputation
allows tokenized assets to be used in business because, just like
underwriting, someone is taking on the risk of losing reputation and
associated cashflow streams if such tokenized asset should in reality
not exist. Insurance could serve a similar function but is much less
efficient as it requires the allocation of capital for holding reserves
to pay out claims etc. Reputation removes the need to deploy capital
for reserves etc. Accordingly, can facilitate unprecedented levels of
liquidity. It removes the need for encumbering capital for tokenized
assets and at the same time through the guarantees it provides for
tokenized assets makes those tokenized assets real for commerce.
The combination of replacing capital with reputation for
tokenization creates the ideal environment for liquidity.
Tokenization itself provides unprecedented liquidity of real assets.
Combining tokenization with reputation underwriting further
enhances the liquidity effects of tokenization. Again, the benefits
for liquidity can only materialize if reputation is meaningful and
secure.
In the case of the DAOIC, the replacement of capital with reputation
increases liquidity for DAOIC members. In the DAOIC model,
because reputation takes over part of the role of capital it frees up
otherwise locked capital for DAOIC members. DAOIC members
can increase their ability to deploy capital because RNFT staking
on deals does not require the deployment of capital while still
generating returns, here through the 20% ROP participation on the
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

public side of a deal, that would otherwise only be possible through
the deployment of capital.
The replacement of capital with reputation gives the DAOIC
members a permanent option and right of first refusal on deals.
DAOIC members can merely stake RNFT on a deal without
participating in the purchase commitment for such a deal. But,
RNFT staking involves two phases, loosely coupled and tightly
coupled votes (as described in Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)). The
information revealed during the loosely coupled voting engagement
should, in most cases, make it clear to each DAOIC member what
deal parameters are at stake. At the same time, the delayed voting
outcomes and associated feedback effects enabled by the transition
from loosely coupled to tightly coupled voting enable DAOIC
members to triangulate their own internal liquidity with deal
feasibility. If a DAOIC member suffers a liquidity crisis, such
member still participates in the fungible reputation salary payouts.
The removal of capital through RNFT staking also makes capital
calls and other liquidity-limiting measures less relevant. There are
no ex post capital commitments associated with an RNFT staking
participation. DAOIC members will commit capital if they can but
during a liquidity squeeze they can opt out of the public side of a
given deal while still participating through the RNFT staking and
associated fungible token salary.
Because a public secondary market exists for the fungible
reputation tokens, DAOIC members not only improve their
liquidity by replacing capital with reputation, their liquidity is also
ensured after the conversion of capital to reputation. The public
market supplements liquidity in fungible reputation tokens if
DAOIC members decide they need to convert fungible reputation
tokens back to capital. This can help supplement their capital-driven
engagements as a liquidity pool.
The removal of capital creates a high level of flexibility for DAOIC
members. It allows the DAOIC members to invest if they so choose
but it does not force them to invest if they disagree with the
collective decision on a given deal.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
DAOIC members can decide which deals are so good that it would
be worth paying themselves the 20% of ROP on the public side as
a fungible token salary. However, the nature of the publicly listed
fungible reputation token is a better value proposition for the
DAOIC members, especially in the long run.
Liquidity can also be significantly improved in the DAOIC design
through the selling of RNFT to the open market. For example, if the
DAOIC should not have enough capital to cover the staked token
commitment in firm commitment underwriting, it may be able to
overcome the shortfall immediately by selling RNFT, which is in
effect selling future cashflow rights associated with the RNFT.
Individual members should have a stable way to exit the system by
selling their reputation tokens for a fair market valuation of the
future expected value of their reputational salary. This is more
problematic for reputation than for most other cryptocurrency
tokens, since reputation is less fungible because a token’s value is
tied to the post in which the reputation was created and subject to
separate review. But in principle it could be algorithmically valued.
This situation of selling RNFTs via the OTC market only arises in
ICD firm commitment underwriting deals that did not sell out on
the public portion. In order to satisfy the capital call that results from
the inability to sell out the public portion of the firm commitment
deal, the respective RNFT member is forced to sell RNFT on the
OTC market only if the respective ICD member cannot satisfy his
or her pro rata capital requirement with liquid capital held by the
ICD member. In that case, RNFT may be sold to cover the lacking
liquidity. It is very likely that the other RNFT holders who still have
liquid assets will wish to purchase the RNFT on the OTC market as
it gives them a larger share of the future cash flows via FRT/GT.
The other relevant situation for selling RNFT via the OTC market
and with it the right to all future cash flows that derive from the
RNFT, is retirement of an ICD member. Should an ICD member
wish to retire from the ICD permanently, the respective ICD
member can sell her RNFT.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

3. Risk Optimization
Running a DAOIC is subject to several risk factors, including but
not limited to the following:
- Limited token opportunities
- High level of uncertainty in digital asset market
- Only 1 in 100 of token opportunities returns 100x, 30x, 10x
- Regulatory uncertainty - investigations
- gaining access to industry expertise in digital assets creates
challenges
- difficult to distinguish core expertise in digital assets
- Since its inception, the digital asset industry has evolved in
silos of information and expertise, making it more difficult
for early-stage investors to gain access to a broad spectrum
of engineering and technology insights.
- Early stage investing in digital assets is a relationships
business. It is key for early-stage investors in digital assets
to be part of a core network of early-stage experts in the
industry.
- Without access to a network of core expertise, early-stage
investments in the digital asset industry are rarely successful
- Without access to experienced decentralized system
architects, legacy investors and venture capitalists struggle
navigating the market for digital assets. During the early
days of the digital asset evolution a very limited amount of
people had relevant experience with the technical and
market aspects of digital assets. Very few were able to build
cryptocurrencies that attempted to solve incentive issues and
create tokens that were compatible with the incentives
design in order to enable participants in the network to act
non-opportunistically and align their utility and economic
incentives in systems with anonymous actors.
- The anonymity in decentralized networks requires a special
skillset for system architects who know how to navigate the
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
limitations in system design that is associated with
anonymity.
- Only very few architects have figured out how to create
system solutions in ways that overcome the challenges of
anonymous and autonomous systems. That skillset is still
very rare in the early 2020s.
- Venture capitalists and crypto hedge funds require key
expertise in helping their portfolio companies on the
operating side.
- Limited amount of qualified technical talent: A key skill that
contributes to portfolio companies’ success is the ability to
hire engineers and run technical teams. The most successful
digital asset investors are able to use their network to help
their portfolio companies successfully hire technical talent.
- Venture companies that do not have a strong background in
community building can be disadvantaged in the digital
asset market. In the digital asset space generally, and more
specifically in the context of ICOs and token design, it is
essential to have some expertise in open-source software
and the associated community building. Incentive designs
for open-source software contributions can also play a large
role.
- Technical decentralized designs take a long time to reach
maturity. Because of the community building aspect and the
built-in experimentation with design features, decentralized
network design can take much longer than other technical
network designs.
- The cryptocurrency market in the early 2020s is still
afflicted with questionable designs, as well as legal and
ethical issues. Many top projects in 2020 are still afflicted
by technical issues that have not been ironed out.
- Because the market has been so hype driven, technical
experience has not added significantly to overall market
development and maturity. Yet, several indicia suggest that
this can change over time.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

The mantra of “Reputation as Capital” has built-in multiple levels
of risk mitigation for the network participants. Through meaningful
reputation in a business network, network participants are
incentivized to cooperate without performing the extra due-
diligence analysis on counterparties in the network and possible
agents of the network.
Reputation removes the need for monitoring cost. It lowers
transaction costs in orders of magnitude. Through reputation in the
interaction between principals and agents, both are incentivized to
watch out for each other and further each other's profit. It is simply
good business to do so as it extends the opportunities for future
frictionless business opportunities. Because reputation is at stake in
each interaction, parties to the network as well as principals and
agents are incentivized to go significantly beyond the key
parameters of their respective contractual obligations to maintain,
extend and protect each their respective reputation.
Reputation is not only the gateway to future revenues and business
opportunities but also becomes a currency with its own value
proposition. Removing readily available and fungible cash and
emphasizing reputation in the network disperses power fairly.
Participants in the network with equivalent talent are equally
acceptable as they are most likely to help protect the reputation of
the collective and each other’s reputation at the same time.
Accordingly, anyone available with similar talents can be given
opportunities.
In the case of the DAOIC, the collective wisdom of DAOIC
members helps hedge against purchase risk. The applicable
decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019))3 provide an optimal incentive
3 Calcaterra, Craig and Kaal, Wulf A. and Andrei, Vlad, Blockchain
Infrastructure for Measuring Domain Specific Reputation in Autonomous
Decentralized and Anonymous Systems (February 18, 2018). U of St.
Thomas (Minnesota) Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-11, Available at
SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/s
srn.3125822
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
design to coordinate collective decision making. Improved
collective decision making in the DAOIC further mitigates purchase
risk.
Similarly, RNFT staking by DAOIC members removes
counterparty risk. The desire to preserve and increase RNFT scores
predominates the DAOIC decision making. Therefore, bad actors
are less likely to occur in the system as their reputation would
inevitably suffer.
Moreover, because the applicable decentralized reputation staking
governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)) with
loosely and tightly coupled votes will very likely make all tightly
coupled votes unanimous. Accordingly, DAOIC members are less
likely to lose RNFTs and continue to receive the stream of fungible
reputation tokens.
Liquidity risk is addressed because the fungible reputation tokens
can be sold on the secondary market as needed by DAOIC
members.
4. Decentralized Underwriting
The DAOIC form of underwriting can be distinguished from
traditional underwriting where underwriters are typically
gatekeepers and create barriers to entry. In the tradition
underwriting market, underwriters serve as gatekeepers for the
purpose of screening offerings for investors. Underwriters with a
good reputation can charge issuers of traditional securities higher
rates, giving underwriters a financial incentive to screen. However,
in the traditional underwriting market, investors can fail to
distinguish underwriters based on reputation. As a result, free-riding
on other’s reputation may occur. Once free riding occurs, traditional
underwriters will likely stop investing in their screening and instead
attempt to free ride on others. This creates what is known as a
lemons problem in the law and economics literature. Moreover,
individual agents within an underwriter may decide to sacrifice the
underwriter’s overall reputation for personal gain. For example, it
is possible that an agent may put out a fraudulent offering on behalf
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

of the underwriter for personal gain, such as additional business for
the agent etc.
The DAOIC’s adoption of decentralized reputation staking
governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)) addresses
these shortcomings of traditional underwriting. In this theoretical
model, the entire incentive design of decentralized governance
aligns the interests of the individual with the interest of the group.
In other words, the incentives of the principal, e.g. the group, and
the individual are aligned so much that the agent cannot gain
personally at the expense of the principal.
As the DAOIC reputation proliferates, in the model, the DAOIC
may become the initial starting point for a public token offering.
The DAOIC can, over time, provide essential services for token
opportunity teams, including but not limited to: source of contact
for large institutional investors, and as a source of financing, e.g. in
firm commitment offerings.
In the DAOIC model, best efforts underwriting via RNFT staking
can be distinguished from firm commitment underwriting via RNFT
staking. Best efforts underwriting is synonymous with the smart
contract accountability system in the DAOIC that allows each
DAOIC member to make a given capital commitment that is
encumbered in the smart contract as a deposit. Such deposit will
only be released and directly transferred to the token opportunity
when the RNFT staking pool has made a decision on the token
opportunity. Funding only happens in the case of a majority upvote.
Only then will the smart contract release the funds from the DAOIC
member to the token opportunity.
This can be contrasted with DAOIC firm commitment
underwriting. In a firm commitment RNFT staking engagement, the
DAOIC does not commit any capital at all, except for the portion of
the token opportunity that does not sell out to the public. In other
words, the DAOIC has to be confident in its ability to translate its
reputation in deal analysis, e.g. RNFT staking on a token
opportunity, into a co-purchase engagement by the public. Should
the public fail to purchase the capped amount of the token
opportunity, the DAOIC will have to sacrifice its own liquidity and
commit to buy the remaining part of the token opportunity sale.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
Having to commit liquidity if the DAOIC’s collective wisdom is
wrong incentivizes the DAOIC community. After all, its
“Reputation as Capital” mantra is largely motivated by the
increased liquidity that is enabled by it. Getting the public
commitment part on a firm underwriting engagement wrong would
neutralize the prior gained liquidity from RNFT staking.
While firm commitment underwriting may be seen as antithetical to
decentralization, it in fact further enhances the level of
decentralization. A firm commitment underwriting by the DAOIC
member collective provides the DAOIC more leverage to increase
the decentralized governance in the token opportunity. Enhanced
decentralized governance of token opportunities, in turn, improves
the level of decentralization in the system overall. Moreover, in a
firm commitment underwriting of a token opportunity DAOIC
internal governance and the RNFT staking with the collective
wisdom of the DAOIC members enable an offset of the potentially
liquidity lowering capital commitment that may result from a
collective misassessment of the public’s interest in a token
opportunity.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

III. Toy Model
Figure 1. Non-Custodial DAOIC Model with Smart Contracts.
Figure 1 illustrates the non-custodial DAO Investment Club
(DAOIC) model with smart contracts. In this model, the entirety of
the ROP is minted into fungible reputation tokens that get paid as
reputation salaries following the decentralized reputation staking
governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)). This
model provides enhanced incentive alignment for DAOIC members
with the highest potential return for all involved.
Roadmap & Overview Legend
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
DOIC Members Deals C/R Ratio Returns Liquidity Growth Risk Mitigation UnderwritingDecentralization Publicity Transparency Accountability Governance Reg Scrutiny
Phase 1 - Market/Dex Market/Dex Market/Dex GT Dex GT Dex
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A GT Dex Listing N/A N/A N/A
Priming in GT in GT in GT Listing Listing
DAOIC: ROP
80% Pro SC coordinates,
DAOIC
Rata to no custody, yet Smart Contracts
Phase 2 - <=5 Active collective
Quality: High Capital 20% small DAOIC N/A No DAOIC coalesce with MVPR
Capital Investors and 100% Capital 100% Capital Low decision making N/A N/A N/A
Quantity: Low Pro Rata to member group, UI MVPR DAOIC Internally
Allocation Analysts hedges agains
RNFT as purchase risk less information internally
FRT. from edge
Public: N/A
DAOIC: ROP DAOIC Collective Best efforts increasing MVPR
underwriting
100% Pro decision making governance, more DAOIC tightly Smart Contracts voluntary
Phase 3 - Quality: High 50% Capital FRT OTC - DAOIC
Rata to hedges RFNT information from coupled RNFT coalesce with MVPR for
Reputation >5, MVPR Quantity: 50% secondary Increasing RNFT PR begins Low
RNFT as staking risk, the edges, shift voting disclosed MVPR DAOIC token
Building Medium Reputation market staking -
FRT MVPR reduce risk from capital to via UI internally opportunity
public
Public: N/A of loss visibility reputation
RNFT firm
Higher degree of
commitment
DAOIC: ROP Scaling DAOIC crowd underwriting reputation, RNFT
100% Pro through wisdom for - DAOIC staking offsets DAOIC Smart Contracts
Rata to firm commitment loosely
public access market capital coalesce with
RNFT as of capital, DOIC coupled RNFT Mandatory
Phase 4 - Quality: High DAOIC to deals - participants, covers MVPR DAOIC
FRT + 20% underwriting PR budget voting MVPR for
Reputation MVPR Quantity: Member FRT Listed 20% Public RNFT staking missing internally and in Investigations
Public ROP increases increase disclosed token
as Capital Higher Discretion ROP shared follows MVPR, public Public portion of
to F D RT A O + I C 7% a s via FRT + token purchases - lev M er V a P ge R for t P ig L h U tly S c D o A u O pl I e C d a capital opportunity
cross spread 7% cross opportunities use DAOIC governance of RNFT voting commitment
as FRT spread MVPR underwriting token
fee 7% cross
opportunities
spread
DAOIC: ROP
100% Pro Mandatory
Phase 5 - Rata to Governance Self regulation TBD - Market High degree as MVPR Protocols Smart Contracts MVPR for N/A, Low -
RNFT as Mainstream increases: market decentralized
Growth Quality: High DAOIC via MVPR lowers terms and Derivatives enforce token
FRT + >20% adoption, Certainty, proliferates regulation
Through MVPR Quantity: Member risk for evolving as N/A become part of governance in opportunities
Public ROP Market Adoption, through more
Market Scaling Discretion participating C/R ratio public domain Public Market and entire
Evolution to F D RT A O + I C 7% a s proliferation D Ev ig o it lu a t l i A o s n s o et f s market segment increases d g e o c v e e n r t n ra a l n iz c e e d and proliferate via MVPR markets/segm compre e hensiv
cross spread ents
as FRT
Table 1: Roadmap & Overview – minimum viable protocol requirements
(MVPR) describes the need for instantiation of decentralized governance designs.
Table 1 shows the life cycle of the DAOIC which involves different
phases that serve different purposes in order to fulfil the ultimate
purpose of the DAOIC. Each phase serves a particular purpose.
Four different phases can be distinguished with different purposes.
Generally speaking phase 1 is concerned with priming the pump and
institutional setups, phase 2 is concerned capital allocation, phase 3
is concerned with reputation building, phase 4 is concerned with
reputation replacing the need for capital allocation, and finally
phase 5 deals with market evolution.
Phase 5 is the growth phase that results from phases 1-3 and is
further extended by mandating decentralized governance via
decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)) in digital asset market segments.
Enhanced decentralized governance helps increase certainty in the
digital asset market which enables increasing mainstream adoption
and ultimately leads to market proliferation.
1. Phase 1 - Priming the Pump
Phase 1 is concerned with core functionality setup of operations in
the DAOIC model. The DAO team has to make certain decision
during phase, including but not limited to: determining the total
supply of its governance token, listing the token on a DEX, open
the token to short list of investors, ensuring the free flow of the
token on the market, among several other core setup functions.
The Capital to Reputation ratio of the DAOIC is at 100% capital
during phase 1 as this is the initiation phase and reputation capital
has not been built yet. Using the decentralized reputation staking
governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)), the
DAOIC mints RNFT in proportion to the capital commitments.
Capital commitments are flexible as both active purchasers and
talented analysts are onboarded. RNFT tokens get minted
proportional to capital commitment, e.g. US$2 million equals 200
RNFTs, or to another metric for talented analysts.
The DAOIC members share returns on purchases (ROP) 80% pro
rata to capital commitment and 20% pro rata to RNFT score. The
20% of ROP is minted into a fungible reputation token (FRT). The
FRT is not liquid in phase 1. The FRT is not listed and cannot be
sold in the OTC secondary market. Accordingly, liquidity
facilitated to DAOIC is low as 100% of capital is committed and
DAOIC members have no liquidity in the FRT salary as the FRT is
not OTC traded and not listed. The overall growth is low in the
initial startup phase 1.
The degree of decentralization is still low in phase 1. Smart
contracts coordinate the DAOIC purchases and interaction with the
token opportunity directly for each DAOIC member. Individual
smart contract engagements remove the need for institutional
custody and associated points of centralization. However, because
the group of DAOIC members is still small, less information comes
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
from the edges of the system. The DAOIC member group is also
presumably homogenous, dissent will be small in the RFNT-based
decision-making processes. Accordingly, the benefits from
decentralization are still relatively small in phase 1.
During phase 1 risk mitigation for DAOIC members is minimal
because reputation has only marginally entered the system. Yet, the
DAOIC members hedge their individual purchase risk and risk of
loss of capital through the decentralized governance-driven
collective reasoning process. During the loosely coupled voting
(staked RFNT vote does not count but is set back to 0 afterwards)
on proposed deals, DAOIC members can see each other’s reasoning
and engage in an open deliberation process to come to the best
choice for each DAOIC member. Yet, no DAOIC user interface
(UI) is available during phase 1 to help coordinate the voting. It is
possible to clone the decentralized reputation staking governance
mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)). UI during phase 1
which may help the DAOIC members to internally coordinate.
However, the UI should not be publicly visible and only serves the
DAOIC members’s internal matters. Publicity and PR expenses are
not needed during Phase 1. However, DAOIC members should start
evaluating what level of publicity is desirable in phase 2 and prepare
their outgoing communications for phase 2.
Transparency is very low during phase 1. DAOIC token purchases
are not publicly visible as the DAOIC is still in the internal
coordination phase. However, accountability for DAOIC members
is high because smart contracts coalesce the decentralized
reputation staking governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al
(2019)) RNFT staking with the respective token capital allocation.
Accordingly, internal accountability is facilitated through smart
contracting.
DAOIC internal governance during phase 1 is facilitated through
cloning the decentralized reputation staking governance
mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)), which ensures
optimal incentivization and internal policing. Regulatory scrutiny
during phase 1 is low because token purchases are facilitated
directly from the purchaser to the token opportunity via smart
contract. The smart contract releases the deposit automatically to
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

the token opportunity after the DAOIC upvote on the purchase
proposal.
2. Phase 2 - Capital Allocation
Capital allocation is the primary objective in phase 2. In the DAOIC
design, capital allocation to token opportunities in phase 2 also sets
up the DAOICs “reputation as governance” mantra. It is also during
phase 2 that capital allocation is used for reputation non-fungible
token (RNFT) minting. RNFTs, in turn, establish the internal
governance of the DAOIC.
Overall, Phase 2 is the governance setup phase where the DAOIC
establishes its own internal governance, forms the founders group,
identifies potential token opportunities internally, and starts
proposing deals. Phase 2 is also the phase where new members are
being introduced and onboarded with their respective deal proposals
via decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)).
In phase 2 of the model, the DAOIC brings in members with their
deals and mints RNFT in proportion to incoming capital. The
number of DAOIC members is presumably below 5 but could be
higher and is subject to the onboarding procedures in the
decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)). The quality of deals brought in by
new members or the DAOIC is high but the quantity remains low
as only the most select and most promising decentralized
infrastructure projects will be selected. Token opportunity selection
follows the voting procedures of the decentralized reputation
staking governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)).
All DAOIC members stake RNFT tokens on identified token
opportunities, either up or down.
In phase 2, the DAOIC member group increases as more people
start appreciating the benefits of “Reputation as Capital” and its
instantiation in the DAOIC. The incoming deal quality remains high
because all DAOIC members are incentivized via decentralized
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
governance to scrutinize incoming deal proposals. The quantity of
incoming deals is increasing in phase 2 as compared to phase 1.
Importantly, in phase 2 the ratio of capital commitment to
reputation (RNFT) commitment (C/R ratio) starts shifting from
100% capital (phase 1) to less than 100% capital. Phase 2 makes it
possible to incrementally move the C/R ratio to around 50/50,
depending on DAOIC individual member preferences.
In light of the shifting C/R ratio, the DAOIC policy for the ROP to
FRT minting ratio is adjusted to move from phase 1 (ROP 80% pro
rata to capital, e.g. ROP to DAI, and 20% pro rata to RNFT as FRT,
e.g. ROP to FRT) to phase 2 (ROP100% pro rata to RNFT as FRT,
e.g. ROP to FRT). The effect of this change in policy is significant.
All ROP is minted into FRT which, in turn, is paid out proportional
to RNFT holdings. This instantiates the important shift from capital
to reputation and shifts the incentives away from capital to
reputation and can be seen as a form of best efforts underwriting on
a token opportunity.
The shift away from capital to reputation starts incrementally.
DAOIC members may still need to commit capital in phases 1 and
2. However, the move away from capital commitments is already
possible. For example, in phases 1 and 2, if the market co-purchases
at 50% of capital commitment of a given deal and 20% of the
corresponding ROP on such deal is allocated to the fungible
reputation token minting pool, which is shared only by the DAOIC
members, then the DAOIC members would in the aggregate be
better off keeping their own ROP at 100% (which is proportional to
their capital commitment) combined with the 20% of ROP from
public/market capital commitments in the fungible reputation token,
which is paid out proportionally to RNFT score. This is especially
true considering that the fungible reputation token is itself an
investment proposition that amplifies the DAOIC members’ initial
capital commitment.
Liquidity of DAOIC members receives a major boost in phase 2
because of the shift from capital to reputation. The liquidity
enhancement is arguably directly proportional to the changes in the
C/R ratio. Liquidity is further significantly enhanced because the
FRT can be traded OTC in a secondary market. This allows the
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

DAOIC members to use the fungible reputation token for their own
liquidity needs. However, full liquidity is not yet achieved in the
FRT as it is not yet traded on public exchanges.
Risk mitigation is enhanced during phase 2 because the DAOIC
collective decision making on incoming deal proposals hedges
against counterparty risk, RNFT staking risk, and risk of capital
loss.
The degree of decentralization is increasing in phase 2 as reputation
is being built by DAOIC members. The cloning of decentralized
reputation staking governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al
(2019)) provides a key point of decentralization to the DAOIC.
Decentralized governance allows the DAOIC to coordinate its
internal governance in a fully decentralized and incentive optimized
fashion. As the DAOIC membership grows, information flow
becomes more diverse and more information enters the system from
the edges. Key increase in the level of decentralization is possible
because 100% of the ROP gets minted into FRT which, in turn,
enables a shift in focus from capital to reputation. Increased
liquidity in phase 2 supports the expansion of decentralization as
DAOIC members can increasingly make diverse decisions in the
system.
Transparency and public awareness and interest in the DAOIC
increases during phase 2 as publicity is increased and public
relations begin. Transparency is significantly advanced during
phase 2 largely because of the user interface (UI) goes online. The
UI is the public registry of the DAOIC deal priorities, updated
monthly. The UI also publishes the RNFT staking outcomes. While
phase 3 enables full transparency, e.g. the loosely coupled votes and
the tightly coupled votes are disclosed as well as all incoming deal
proposals, in phase 2, the UI does not disclose the reasoning process
and the discourse during loosely coupled votes. In phase 2, the UI
only discloses the outcomes of the RNFT staking pools, e.g. the
final results of the collective reasoning process of the DAOIC on a
given deal. This incomplete transparency is needed during phase 2
to ensure the DAOIC can experiment with policy adjustments
without fear of public market impact.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
Accountability during phase 2, as in phase 1, is ensured through
smart contract coordination of individual DAOIC member’s
purchase commitments. The smart contract does not release
encumbered deposits, intended for a particular token opportunity,
until the RNFT staking pool has decided on the funding of a token
opportunity. Assets are not pooled but purchases take place
individually through each individual DAOIC member via smart
contract with the token opportunity.
Governance of the DAOIC in phase 2 still revolves around the
decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)). and is used for the DAOIC internal
governance. Yet, in phase 2 the DAOIC may start to offer the
benefits of decentralized governance to token opportunities.
Regulatory scrutiny in phase 2 is low because the DAOIC engages
in very little publicity and still does mostly internally generated
deals which are governed by smart contracts entirely.
3. Phase 3 - Reputation Building
“Reputation Building” summarizes the core function of phase 3
which is a core necessity for the “Reputation as Capital” mantra that
will be introduced in phase 4. Reputation building begins for each
DAOIC member and incoming DAOIC members by staking RNFT
on incoming deals.
Reputation staking in phase 3 serves multiple purposes. First, it
establishes the need to gain and maintain reputation to be able to
participate financially in the DAOIC. This is largely an educational
function because reputation as capital has not been possible via
token economics before and takes a period of education and
adjustment for many individuals. Second, reputation staking
establishes the governance metrics that enable the DAOIC to create
superior returns for the DAOIC community while at the same time
policing itself. Third, reputation staking instills the notion that
reputation in the long-term is more important and more valuable
than capital. It also establishes the notion that one can benefit
individually while at the same time benefiting the group of DAOIC
members.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

The C/R ratio, the key indicator of reputation replacing capital in
the DAOIC, shifts higher in phase 3. It is in phase 3 that DAOIC
members can exercise their discretion as to whether they wish to
participate in an undertaking, other than a firm commitment
undertaking that did not result in a fully subscribed public deal (see
more details under firm commitment underwriting).
Phase 3 is also a major growth phase for the DAOIC. In phase 3,
the DAOIC engages in a form of RNFT firm commitment
underwriting. Should the public not purchase the entire token
commitment, only then the DAOIC is liable to commit capital for
the outstanding portion of the public sale. That firm commitment
underwriting allows a fee of 7% of the cross spread for the given
token opportunity.
While phase 3 enables full transparency, e.g. the loosely coupled
votes and the tightly coupled votes are disclosed as well as all
incoming deal proposals.
4. Phase 4 - Reputation as Capital
Phase 4 is key for the DAOIC as it is during phase 4 that the
majority of the benefits of the DAOIC design materialize. DAOIC
members are onboarded following decentralized reputation staking
governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)) only for
new members who bring in deals that benefit the DAOIC
ecosystem. Deal quality is consistently high to protect the RNFT
scores of the existing members. Yet, because of the increasing
publicity of the benefits of the DAOIC model the on boarding of
new members with high quality deals increases and the quantity of
deals increases accordingly.
Phase 4 enables a consolidation of the shift away from capital. In
phase 3, if the market purchases 100% of capital commitment of a
given deal, based on DAOIC member staking on the deal, and 20%
of the corresponding ROP on such deal is allocated to the fungible
reputation token minting pool, which is shared only by the DAO
investment club members, then the DAOIC members would in the
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
aggregate be better off keeping their own ROP at 100% (which is
proportional to their capital commitment) combined with the 20%
of ROP from public/market capital commitments in the fungible
reputation token, which is paid out proportionally to RNFT score.
DAOIC can still invest on the public side if they so choose.
In the model, key for phase 4 is the returns for DAOIC members
increase to 100% ROP + 20% ROP from the public market + 7%
cross spread from firm commitment RNFT underwriting of token
opportunities. In other words, through the move from capital to
reputation in phase 3, the DAOIC is able to amplify its returns on
both the public purchase side but also on the token opportunity side
of the deals. During phase 3, the public co-purchases deals based on
the RNFT staking on deals by the DAOIC members. The public
receives their ROP pro rata to capital commitment in DAI.
It is during phase 4 that the full breadth of liquidity that is generated
by the DAOIC design materializes. Most importantly, the FRT is
listed on a public exchange. This gives DAOIC not only a strong
profitability opportunity but also liquidity in public markets. It
should be assumed that demand for FRT is strong (see further under
FRT economics). The fungible reputation token may only be a
public secondary market. E.g. the fungible reputation token is
available only to DAOIC members who may sell the token on a
public exchange if they so choose to create liquidity.
5. Phase 5 – Growth Through Market Evolution
Phase 5 introduces the long-term effects of the DAOIC model on
the overall market. During phase 5, the DAOIC model suggests that
the DOIC may have the opportunity to help token projects
incorporate decentralized governance for the greater good of the
overall ecosystem. Phase 5 also marks the period when the
“reputation as capital” mantra of the model may prove to truly
unfold as more and more capital heavy businesses may start to
appreciate the benefits of reputation as capital. This, in turn, may
result in increasing adoption of the DAOIC model in different
implementations. During phase 5, the DAOIC may be engaging in
long-term policy optimization. The policy considerations are further
discussed below.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

IV. Policy Considerations
The DAOIC design has the potential to upgrade financial structures
and financial designs. Given this potential, several long-term policy
implications seem inevitable. The DAOIC has the potential to
provide standards for governance in finance, using its influence for
good, and increase accountability in finance.
1. Standard Setting
Proper governance enables long-term growth. The DAOIC can use
its market power for good. The DAOIC is internally governed by
decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)). The decentralized reputation
staking governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019))
ensure incentive optimized fully transparent internal governance.
Moreover, through the use of decentralized governance, the DAOIC
can help improve the governance of the digital asset market.
It is conceivable that the DAOIC, over time, once its position in the
market has been solidified, mandates the adoption of decentralized
governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019) for the
governance of each token opportunity, before it begins the RNFT
staking process on a given token opportunity. At a minimum, it is
conceivable that the DAOIC encourages s the incorporation of
decentralized governance mechanisms for purposes of the particular
token opportunity purchase, both for the DAOIC RNFT staking
portion and the following market purchase of the token opportunity.
In essence, the DAOIC would use its market power for good by
mandating governance reform for DAOIC RNFT staking in a given
token opportunity. This enhancement of decentralized governance
provides long-term benefits for the DAOIC as its own oversight of
its investments is becoming easier across different market
segments.
The decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)) provide a higher form of
decentralized governance than most legal standards in a given
jurisdiction. Using the decentralized governance for self-
governance instills the highest forms of ethics in the token
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
opportunity which over time can reform the market into a fully
decentralized form of ethics and governance. It is possible that the
DAOIC may be perceived as using its influence to inappropriately
force governance solutions on token opportunities. Yet, the use of
decentralized governance will help the digital asset space mature
quicker.
As an advocate for digital asset standards, the DAOIC helps
upgrade the digital asset space to become ready for mass adoption.
Without standards for digital assets, it will be very difficult to
increase regulatory certainty in the digital asset space and
coordinate market activity. Without regulatory certainty the market
for digital assets is less likely to evolve.
In addition to the commercial benefits of being perceived as a
standard setter and governance optimizer for the digital asset space,
the DAOIC advocacy for digital asset governance and standards of
governance could make it a beacon of self-regulatory upgrades for
the digital asset space.
Creating a self-regulated protective environment for digital asset
markets participants may be seen by regulators as favorable which,
in turn, could help the DAOIC to cooperate with regulators.
Cooperation with regulators is in the long-term interest of the
DAOIC and the self-regulated digital asset space.
The DAOIC smart contract and reputation engine (following
decentralized reputation staking governance mechanisms
(Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)) provides enhanced transparency
and accountability. A basic smart contract coordinates the deposits
of DAOIC purchases and the release of such deposits after a DAOIC
RNFT staked upvote on a token opportunity. Said smart contract
will likely be fully transparent, even without the access to the
Casper network via a specific user interface.
In order to facilitate public access and review of the DAOIC RNFT
staking, a workable UI may be needed. The UI creates the needed
level of transparency but is also potentially a legal liability (needs
to be further evaluated with lawyers).
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

It is conceivable that the public will already begin to react with
interest to a token purchase opportunity after observing the loosely
coupled vote of the DAOIC. One would need to consider what level
of publicity the smart contract should entail in order to protect the
public and minimize legal risk. Perhaps a workable compromise
could involve only putting the final DAOIC RNFT staking vote on
a given deal in the tightly coupled format on the UI/webpage.
Transparency of the RNFT staking by DAOIC members also
ensures the adequate management of potential conflicts of interest.
For example, DAOIC members who stake RNFT on a given deal
but also participate in the public portion of the purchase
commitment may have a conflict of interest in the sense that they
may be perceived by the market as having prior knowledge of a
particular deal and could potentially use that to their advantage, by
approaching the token opportunity team in advance, among other
nefarious practices. However, such practices are rather limited
because of the transparent nature of the loosely coupled RNFT
voting on a particular deal and the transition to tightly coupled
voting. The public may not see the debate about deal priorities
before they are published but the public will see the particular
loosely coupled voting on a particular deal that is at issue.
Accordingly, potential DAOIC member conflicts of interest
deriving from participation on the public side of a deal commitment
are minimized.
2. Accountability
In the DAOIC model, the smart contract transparency is
accompanied by enhanced accountability. Each transaction and
purchase after a RNFT staked upvote can be easily tracked. Each
DAOIC member transaction can be traced via wallets. This
accountability in combination with enhanced transparency of the
smart contract transactions increases overall counterparty risk
reporting, if any.
Because the smart contracts automate the purchase of the token
opportunity by each DAOIC member and coordinates the payouts
to the token opportunity, both parties are entirely accountable to
each other. Funds do not get released until there is an upvote by the
DAOIC members. Timing of the upvote follows the decentralized
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
reputation staking governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al
(2019)) and is thus also entirely public and transparent.
Similarly, a smart contract can coordinate how the ROP can be
minted into fungible reputation tokens. The ratio of ROP to fungible
reputation token minting can be adjusted over time. This process is
also entirely transparent to the DAOIC members.
3. Market Power
The relationship between the token opportunity, aka investment
project, and the DAOIC has several dimensions that have long-term
policy implications. It is conceivable that the DAOIC could gain
substantial influence over the deal terms with token opportunities.
This influence brings responsibility to the DAOIC members.
In order to protect the DAOIC interests, it is conceivable to make it
a condition for DAOIC purchases to bifurcate the DAOIC
investment portion and co-purchase of the public market for each
deal. In other words, the DAOIC would only purchase a token
opportunity if the token opportunity team agrees to some of the
terms below. Moreover, the DAOIC may have a reasonable
expectation that the token opportunity creates favorable conditions
for the DAOIC because the DAOIC RNFT staking sets the token
opportunity up for success in the public sale portion of their token
sale, both in the DAOIC portion of the public sale and any public
sales thereafter. Accordingly, it may be reasonable to consider some
of the following terms:
1. The total amount of DAOIC purchase commitment.
Token opportunity should agree to give DAOIC a
percentage of the token opportunity as a right of first
refusal before the public market gets access to said
token opportunity
2. The corresponding public market portion of the
DAOIC engagement
3. The timing of other public market purchases that
materialize after the DAOIC purchase.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

4. Token opportunity should give the DAOIC most
favorable terms for token purchases among any
purchasers, e.g. timing, price, caps etc.
5. Because the DAOIC creates a public market backlog
effect because of its transparency, the token
opportunity may be required to give the DAOIC
preferred terms over any other early round with
another VC fund / institutional investor.
Contrasting the above evaluation as to the relationship between the
DAOIC and the token opportunity, it is also conceivable that the
token opportunity should treat the DAOIC and the market the same,
and the DAOIC should insist on equal terms for the DAOIC and the
overall market.
Several arguments in favor of market neutrality could justify this
approach:
1. The DAOIC should not take a position that in any way can
be seen or construed as moving or manipulating the market
in a token opportunity. It is in the long-term interest of the
DAOIC to be a market neutral player in digital assets.
Market neutrality ensures long-term independence and
lessens regulatory pressure. An overall DAOIC policy of
market neutrality could help ensure that the DAOIC is, once
it proliferates, not perceived as a bad actor by the market,
counterparties, and regulators. Should the DAOIC be
perceived as having a market impact, it could significantly
increase corruptive influences coming from other market
players. This, in turn, increases the likelihood of regulatory
interventions.
2. The DAOIC may insist that the token opportunity
randomize its purchaser selection criteria post RNFT
staking by the DAOIC on said token opportunity.
Randomization can help ensure neutrality.
3. The DAOIC may insist that the token opportunity
anonymize its purchaser selection criteria post RNFT
staking by the DAOIC on said token opportunity. This may
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
run afoul of AML and KYC compliance requirements in
several jurisdictions. Yet, it would instill market confidence
into a fair allocation of token purchase opportunities, which
would in the long run help the DAOIC because it makes it
more likely for the DAOIC to be perceived as a neutral
market oracle.
4. Decentralized Coordination
The DAOIC presents a core form of decentralized management. It
does not feature any centralized form of management in the
traditional sense. It is a true investment club in the sense that all
decisions are made via RNFT staking, following the decentralized
reputation staking governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al
(2019)). All decisions are made independently by each DAOIC
investor individually and without coordination. The smart contract
only holds the purchase amount as a deposit until the RNFT
validation pool has approved an investment. Once the investment
has been approved by the validation pool, the smart contract
releases the deposit directly to the project. No pooling of assets
takes place.
The ROP from each deal is also not pooled but rather paid out pro
rata to the DAOIC members in proportion to their RNFT holdings.
For the 20% of ROP that is coming in from the public and minted
into fungible reputation tokens, pooling here only pertains to the
portion that is considered an “access to information fee.” In other
words, the 20% of ROP coming from the public is paid as a fee to
the DAOIC in exchange for the ability to find out about the DAOIC
deals that are upvoted via RNFT staking by DAOIC members.
The key difference from the traditional VC model is that even for
the co-purchases through the market, the DAOIC only makes their
investment choices public. The co-purchases by the public are
entirely voluntary, the DAOIC never provides investment analysis
etc. All that is visible is that the DAOIC members approved for the
DAOIC members’ smart contract to release the deposit for a
purchase of the token opportunity. If the public trades along, that
has arguable only a tentative connection to the DAOIC. It is similar
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

to a VC fund disclosing publicly where they are investing and the
public having direct access to also invest in such projects.
V. Governance Adjustments
Governance metrics in decentralized designs are subject to dynamic
upgrade processes over time. The DAOIC governance design is
subject to such governance upgrade requirements in a dynamic
evolutionary process. The following ratios can be adjusted during
different phases of the DAOIC. Ratio adjustments provide a key
tool for strategic increases in profitability and overall DAOIC
policy. Ratio adjustments should be subject to DAOIC member vote
following the decentralized reputation staking governance
mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)).
1. Minting Ratio of Capital Commitment to RNFT
DAOIC may start in the priming the pump phase 1 by keeping
capital commitments to $2 mil for each incoming purchaser which
is minted into 200 RNFT. This incentivizes people to commit
capital to keep their spot. For simplicity, in phases 2 and 3, the
DAOIC follows the baseline minting ratio of RNFT for an upvote
proposal as specified in the decentralized reputation staking
governance mechanisms (Calcaterra & Kaal et al (2019)).
2. Ratio of Capital Commitment to RNFT Staking
The ratio of capital commitment on a given deal to RNFT staking
commitment on such deal illustrates how reliant the DAOIC is on
incoming and committed capital. The ratio measures the degree of
reputation usage as a proxy for capital. The DAOIC may mandate
a minimum commitment in phases 1 and 2 but in phase 3 may wean
off the ratio and, thus, enable an increasing reliance on RNFT
staking and fungible reputation token revenue to DAOIC members.
This ratio adjustment makes it possible to move away from capital
to increase the community benefits of reputation as capital.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
3. Minting Ratio of ROP to Fungible Reputation Token
The minting ratio of ROP on a funded deal to fungible reputation
token measures the speed of capital conversion into fungible
reputation tokens. Arguably, it should be a 1 to 1 ratio based on the
ROP dollar equivalent value through phases 1-3, regardless if it is
from the 20% of ROP from public purchases or the ROP from
DAOIC purchases.
During phase 3 it seems possible to consider an increase in the
minting ratio as reputation increasingly replaces capital. This could
have a significant impact on the scaling of the system and the
returns of the DAOIC members. It may be defensible to adjust the
ratio in phase 3 in an effort to scale the DAOIC publicly listed
fungible reputation tokens and increase their value proposition. The
counterargument here suggests that an increase in the ratio would
increase supply which destroys demand. Yet, this may not be
entirely true, it is theoretically possible that the demand for the
reputation token is so significant that the ratio adjustment becomes
a much welcomed policy tool to adjust pricing. Of course, there are
potential legal issues associated with using the ratio adjustment as
a policy tool.
Arguably during phases 1-2, the minting ratio of the ROP to
fungible reputation tokens as it pertains to the ROP from DAOIC
member investments can be adjusted. The rationale for this
adjustment is associated with the need for increased fungible
reputation tokens during phases 1-2.
During phase 3, the 20% of the public ROP portion is increasing the
proportional ROP minting into fungible reputation tokens.
Therefore, the need for a higher minting ratio from DAOIC ROP to
fungible reputation token is removed over time.
4. Ratio of Market to DAOIC Capital Commitments
The ratio of market purchases to DAOIC purchases on a given deal
is subject to many factors. This ratio is certainly affected by a cap
on the total amount of potential purchases in a token opportunity.
For example, some token opportunities may not at all be open to the
public market because the token opportunity team decides it does
not want public market exposure. Conversely, some token
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

opportunity teams may decide to use the DAOIC purchase publicly
to create a market frency in their token. It may be up to the DAOIC
to determine what is in their best interest to maintain their collective
reputation in the market and ensure ethical business practices and
corresponding longevity of the DAOIC.
It seems possible to use several measures pertaining to this ratio in
an effort to adjust policy. For example, a predetermined cap on the
ratio, e.g. 50/50 has effects on the market demand and profitability
as well as on the ROP to fungible reputation minting ratio.
5. Minting Ratio of Market Purchases to Fungible Reputation
Tokens
The ratio of market purchases to DAOIC purchases for a given deal
as it relates to minting of new fungible reputation tokens is a
measure for how much the market relies on and trusts the
reputation-driven DAOIC.
A higher proportion of market purchases to DAOIC purchases
(assuming a fully transparent and efficient market) could justify
higher minting of fungible reputation tokens because the higher
proportion of market purchases to DAOIC purchases is testimony
to the fact that the market increasingly adopts the reputation-driven
opportunities that derive from RNFT staking by DAOIC members.
VI. Conclusion
The replacement of capital with reputation has several core benefits
above and beyond traditional finance. Decentralized systems can
take the removal of investment capital from deals to the next level.
Replacing capital with reputation increases liquidity. When
reputation takes over part of the role of capital it frees up otherwise
locked capital that cannot fully be utilized. Decentralized
investment vehicles are able to deploy capital more effectively
because reputation staking on deals does not require the deployment
of capital.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3949098

