DECENTRALIZATION AND FEEDBACK EFFECTS
Decentralization and Feedback Effects
Wulf A. Kaal**
Abstract
This article discusses the historical most relevant types of
decentralization that helped usher in the age of decentralization.
Key components of decentralization that are discussed herein
include: decentralization of science, technological
decentralization, organizational decentralization, market
decentralization, governmental decentralization, and societal
decentralization. The author discusses the feedback effects that
exist between the respective types of decentralization.
Key Words: Decentralization, History, Digital Assets,
Decentralized Finance, Blockchain, Start-up, Decentralized
Commerce, Emerging Technology, Token Models, Incentive
Design, Tokens, Distributed Ledger Technology, Decentralized
Infrastructure, Reputation Staking
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
** Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis,
USA). The author is gratefull for ongoing discussions about decentralized
technology solutions with Craig Calcaterra. The author is also grateful for
outstanding research assistance from Hayley Howe and research librarian
assistance from Nicole Kinn. The author did not receive any form of financial
incentive for authoring this article.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 3
II. DECENTRALIZATION OF SCIENCE ........................................................ 3
TECHNOLOGICAL DECENTRALIZATION ......................................................... 6
III. ORGANIZATIONAL DECENTRALIZATION .......................................... 8
IV. MARKET DECENTRALIZATION ...................................................... 13
V. GOVERNMENTAL DECENTRALIZATION .............................................. 19
VI. SOCIETAL DECENTRALIZATION .................................................... 24
VII. FEEDBACK EFFECTS ..................................................................... 29
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

I. Introduction
The very nature of decentralization and the resulting diversity
makes categorization of decentralization difficult. Decentralized
systems are constantly morphing and evolving with new features.
The resulting diversity of facets of decentralization make
categorization difficult. Yet, there are certain areas where the
application of decentralization is of greatest impact and these
areas tend to impact each other. Such applications can be
categorized by core commonalities and iterative feedback effects.
The resulting general types of decentralization include but are not
limited to the following:
1. Decentralization of science
2. Technological decentralization
3. Organizational decentralization
4. Market decentralization
5. Governmental decentralization
6. Societal decentralization
These types of decentralization, among others, are each subject to
iterative decentralization processes and affect each other by way
of feedback effects. As one type proliferates, the other types are
slowly but increasingly affected, leading to changes that, in turn,
affect each other. The combined learning and feedback effects lead
to the creation of new markets while changing other markets and,
over time, create a slowly emerging new economy. The different
forms of decentralized commerce affect society at multiple levels,
as different constituents begin to experiment with their own
applications and new solutions, in turn, create feedback effects for
each of the six types of decentralization.
II. Decentralization of Science
Throughout history, science’s evolution has been mostly
centralized. Centralization in science has been a natural result of
the scientific consensus of leading experts in a given field who
later passed on their collective insights and their prevailing
opinions to the general public. The general public had no means of
fact checking scientific findings and the prevailing opinion,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
partially because the general public lacked the sophistication,
knowledge, and the tools to second-guess scientific expert
consensus.
Experts enable scientific advancement. Science and its ever-
increasing significance for society would not be possible without
the expertise, knowledge, talent, and effort of naturally gifted
experts who dedicate their lives to their respective fields. The
division of labor and the specialization of experts in a given field
is a natural way to increase scientific output for society.
Scientists were the first to realize the benefits of network
infrastructure for enhanced scientific output. For example, the
evolution of the internet would not have been possible without the
significant input and volunteer work from the science community.
Through networks, relatively small geographic groups of scientists
in a given fields were able to increase their exposure to the
insights of colleagues and improve their own findings and
scientific output.
The centralized nature of instruments of scientific development
and research results in naturally centralized scientific consensus.
Without the ability to create a broader societal consensus, the need
for peer recognition to advance a given field of research
discourages individual responsibility and individual creativity. The
centralized instruments developed to facilitate peer recognition
can result in expert-focused thinking and practices that ignore
community-driven ideas. The perceived need in the scientific
community to place scientific output in ranked scientific journals
can inculcate and perpetuate scientific bias. Scientific journals
typically prefer to publish papers that reject the null hypothesis,
use big datasets, and demonstrate big effect sizes. Significant
findings that do not meet these criteria may simply be ignored.
The use of peer reviews can further exacerbate these effects and
can result in forms of cartelization of knowledge because non-
conforming innovative ideas may not get full recognition. In an
effort to protect and perpetuate existing scientific findings and the
scientific hierarchies that helped create them, new findings may
not (or only much delayed) get scientific peer recognition.
The centralization of scientific methods and output has led to
suboptimal outcomes for society. A litany of studies suggest that
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

scientific findings are frequently questionable or cannot be
reproduced.1 Non-expert forecasters are often better than expert
forecasters.2 Random selection of stocks can produce superior
results in comparison with expert selection.3 Perhaps the most
notorious example of the vagaries of centralized expert opinions
and their scientific support is provided by the health and nutrition
industry. In particular, the often contradictory yet industry
supported prevailing expert science/opinions on nutrition and
dieting over the last century illustrate the detrimental effects on
society created by path dependencies in science.4
Decentralization of science is an iterative process inaugurated by
the increasing networkability of society. As interested parties are
increasingly networked through technology, they can now
collectively second guess the prevailing expert opinions in a given
field of science. This collective decision-making process is most
certainly afflicted by conspiracy theorists, pseudo-science, cranks,
lemmings, and herd mentalities. Yet, the collective reasoning
process creates a wisdom of the crowd that is often lead by experts
in their respective fields. Over time, the impurities of collective
decision-making filter themselves out as interdisciplinary feedback
effects allow enhanced testability of outputs over time.
Decentralized peer-to-peer paradigm shifts of prior-held
centralized scientific insights are possible and will proliferate.
Economics of science supports this decentralized paradigm shift
because through the increased networkability the cost of
ascertaining the accuracy of scientific results is decreasing while
the price for being inaccurate or wrong as a scientist is increasing.
Public access to scientific output is increasing. The scientific
community has started to realize the need to make their work
1 Wikipedia. Reproducibility Project,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reproducibility_Project (accessed June 1, 2020).
2 Wikipedia. Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superforecasting:_The_Art_and_Science_of_Pred
iction (accessed June 1, 2020).
3 S.H. (June 4, 2014). No Monkey Business? The Economist,
https://www.economist.com/free-exchange/2014/06/04/no-monkey-business
(accessed June 1, 2020).
4 Amidor, Toby (May 10, 2019). Has Nutrition Really Changed Over the Past
40 Years? U.S.News, https://health.usnews.com/health-news/blogs/eat-
run/articles/how-the-dietary-guidelines-have-changed (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
accessible to a broader audience. Wikipedia illustrates the power
of decentralized scientific paradigm shifts or affirmations.
Wikipedia depends on the wisdom of the crowd with random
experts in a given field leading entries for the greater good of
society. Many scientists have begun to publish semi-popular or
popular books that illustrate the significance and applications of
their findings and research. For example, whereas in the past,
econometric research was the domain of an elite group of research
economists, popular books such as Nudge5 or Freakonomics6 have
provided the public with easier access to and an enhanced
appreciation for research findings in the fields of behavioral
economics. In computer science, the open source movement has
made scientific contributions to computer science publicly
available. In other disciplines, online journals and public postings
on the Social Science Research Network and Researchgate are
increasingly influential and common. Moreover, other blogging
outlets such as Medium are becoming an ever-increasing relevant
medium of communication and information exchange. The
centralized restrictions of publishing in academic journals do not
apply to these emerging publication mediums. Overall, the public
access to scientific output is increasing dramatically. This could
suggest an overall move away from centralized scientific tools.
Technological Decentralization
Technological forms of decentralization are a natural extension of
the decentralization of science. As scientific developments in a
given field advance, the technological tools for such scientific
discoveries evolve as well and in turn drive new scientific
findings. Technological tools include materials, techniques, skill
sets, and processes. For example, the invention of the printing
press advanced scientific exchange which in turn enabled new
insights and a broader dissemination of scientific discoveries.
5 Thaler, Richard H., & Sunstein, Cass R. (2008). Nudge : Improving Decisions
About Health, Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven: Yale University Press.
6 Levitt, Steven D.. & Dubner, Steven J. (2006). Freakonomics : A Rogue
Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything. New York: William
Morrow.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

Such technological tools enable feedback effects for the
advancement of science and society.
Historically, several technology-related infrastructure
developments predated decentralized peer-to-peer technology
solutions. Digitization in combination with the proliferation of the
internet enabled the digital transformation of business and society.
In turn, the digital transformation economy where digital
transformation of a given business moves to the core of that
business, became a natural precursor to the internet of things and
its progeny. Cross-pollination from the proliferation of
telecommunication and IoT accelerated the proliferation of social
media and the associated increase in networkability of society.
Cloud computing and peer-to-peer computing developed as a
natural extension of digital transformation. The combination of
these developments increased the networkability of society and
enabled for the first time in history a form of decentralized
production at lower cost. The combination of technology
infrastructure and economies of scale facilitated peer-to-peer
transactions at scale.
Technological forms of decentralization started to become
increasingly possible in the aftermath of the invention of the
internet. By creating online communities and giving them the
ability to communicate across borders in real-time, the internet
created new forms of communication, e-commerce, and
knowledge exchange on the edges of the network. The initial
pioneers of internet technology saw it as a fully decentralized
network that could not be controlled by any one person or entity.
When it became apparent that consumer preferences would require
political compromises in the internet architecture, the initial vision
of the internet morphed into the cyberpunk movement. BitTorrent
demonstrated that decentralized protocols, applications, and
ledgers are difficult to censor or regulate. Future versions of
decentralized protocols will likely expand the visions of their
predecessors, such as BitTorrent and the original internet
architecture.
The transition from a traditional client-server computing
architecture to a peer-to-peer networking architecture was the most
significant step toward the evolution of decentralized technology.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
Through the removal of centralized hosts and servers, the nodes
that form the peer-to-peer network make computing resources,
such as disk storage, network bandwidth, and processing power,
directly available to each other. Network effects proliferate in
peer-to-peer networks because, unlike the traditional client-server
architecture which is subject to the linearly increasing per-unit
costs, the peer-to-peer network costs decrease with each added
node.
Blockchain-based decentralized technology solutions emerged
almost a decade after the first instantiation of peer-to-peer
networking. In 2009, Satoshi Nakamoto released the Bitcoin
whitepaper which later was instantiated in code and created the
cryptocurrency BTC. It was released as a blockchain with an
incrementally growing registry of transactions that could not be
changed. The cryptocurrency community continues to evaluate
abstractions and use cases for the consensus mechanism of
Bitcoin.
At the beginning of the twenty first century, blockchain
technology epitomizes decentralized technology. Blockchains such
as the Bitcoin blockchain distribute value and power across global
systems. They allow the more equitable, open, and efficient
exchange of information. Blockchain technology has the potential
to transform the existing digital universe into a complex adaptive
system of the kinds found in nature.
It can help facilitate complex coordination between unknown
network participants on a global scale. The technology has the
potential to create a complex yet efficient human-machine
ecosystem that facilitates complexity without chaos, abundance
without excess, multiplicity without superfluity, and coordination
without control.
III. Organizational Decentralization
The central themes in the story of civilization revolve around the
core challenge of coordinating human behavior and groups of
humans to behave in peaceable and productive ways. To
accomplish peaceable and produce coordination of human
behavior it is necessary to align different groups of humans with
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

each other. Incentive coordination and incentive alignment
between disparate groups of individuals play a central role role in
this context. In the post industrialized era, forms of limited
liability entities became a focus point for the coordination of
human behavior through incentive designs. In limited liability
entities, coordination revolves around those individuals who
delegate authority (principals) and those who are acting on behalf
of others (agents). Because of naturally human shortcomings,
bounded rationality, incomplete foresight, and information
asymmetries between principal and agent,7 it is impossible for
principals to contract for every possible action or inaction of the
agent in order to induce the agent to act in the best interest of the
principal.8 Agency theory is the leading theory for conflicts
between the constituents of limited liability entities, such as
shareholders, corporate managers, and debt holders, among
others.9 A vast literature attempts to explain the nature of the
agency conflicts and possible ways to resolve such conflicts.10
Theory and practice have not successfully addressed the
outstanding issues. For example, the core agency conflicts
emanating from the separation of ownership (shareholder
principal) and control (manager agent) cannot be fully addressed
by the existing theoretical and legal framework. Accordingly,
peaceable and productive human behavior is still found wanting in
many ways.
Organizational models are the product of path dependencies that
undermine the evolution of organizational decentralization.
7 Kaal, Wulf A. (2014), Evolution of Law: Dynamic Regulation in a New
Institutional Economics Framework. In Wulf A. Kaal Mattias Schmidt, &
Andreas Schwartze (Eds.), Festschrift zu Ehren von Christian Kirchner. Mohr
Siebeck.
8 Brennan, Michael J. (1995). Corporate Finance Over the Past 25 Years.
Financial Management, 24(2), 9.
9 Jensen, Michael C. & Meckling, William H. (1976). Theory of the Firm:
Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership Structure. Journal of
Financial Economics, 3, 305. The agency model at its very basic level suggests
that information asymmetries between the principal and the agent and agents’
opportunistic behavior resulting from self-interest leads to principals’ lacking
trust in agents
10 For an overview of the relevant literature see, Shieffer, Andre & Vishny,
Robert W. (1997). A Survey of Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance,
52(2), 737-783.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
Society evolved under the paradigm of hierarchy and top-down
command and control. Such hierarchical coordination of human
behavior creates path dependencies for organizations that
coordinate human behavior. Society tends to default to the existing
centralized and hierarchical paradigm for the creation of
organizational modes. Because of these societal path
dependencies, organizational decentralization is subject to
significant obstacles that hinder the transition of power from
governments and large hierarchical organizations to the edges.
Business leaders have used early forms of organizational
decentralization within hierarchical structures as a business
management tool for the coordination of human behavior and for
enhanced economic performance for decades. In the pre-and-post
internet era, companies have used decentralization of their
organizational structures to their advantage without significant
new technological innovation. General Electric (GE) under Jack
Welch provides a prominent example of successful organizational
decentralization. Before GE was run by Jack Welch, it was a
highly centralized institution with a highly centralized bureaucracy
that created significant inefficiencies and depressed economic
performance. Welch decentralized GE by separating out GE
business units that had previously been linked in a conglomerate
with associated reporting duties etc. Under Welch, each new
business unit maintained its own profit-and-loss statement and
were so independent that if Unit A wanted to buy a product from
Unit B, it had to pay the full market price. Segmenting the
company and creating distance and, in fact, competition between
departments and business units worked. Welch’s approach
required each business unit to become fully accountable and
remove inefficiencies. Welch’s method enabled each business unit
to be run efficiently and profitably, while allowing unit heads
significant flexibility and independence. GE’s market value
skyrocketed as a result of its decentralization of business units.
Technological forms of decentralization via the internet enabled
new hybrid forms of organization. Internet-based platform
companies like eBay and Amazon provide examples of centralized
companies that decentralized the customer experience. These
companies combined the best of both worlds. They used the
structure, control and associated profit optimization of centralized
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

entities and combined it with the bottom-up approach of
decentralization in the form of customer reviews. This
combination brought significant success to eBay but also created
tensions. While people are willing to trust others by way of user
ratings, they also require safeguards for consumers that typically
require command-and-control centralized structures. EBay’s use
of network effects and network growth made it increasingly useful
and increased the likelihood that customers would stay with the
network. While the user ratings eBay uses clearly have flaws (that
illustrate the need for a decentralized reputation verification
system), so far, no entity or individual has been able to come up
with a better technology. EBays decentralized user ratings proved
to be its biggest competitive advantage. Like eBay, Amazon is a
hybrid organization in the sense that it has a centralized
hierarchical control structure combined with a powerful set of
decentralization features. Amazon also tapped into peoples’
generosity and desire for community by channeling it in to a
decentralized network of reviewers in a reviewer system.
Existing hierarchical organizations have long experimented with
organizational designs that allow them to stay more nimble to
foster innovation. As the bureaucratic hierarchy inevitably grows
over time, creating red tape, inefficiencies, and ever increasing
transaction cost, hierarchical organizations benefit from keeping a
startup mentality that fosters innovation. Accordingly, they have
started to experiment with flat hierarchies, co-creation, and best-
idea-wins approaches, albeit in the existing hierarchical order.
Especially the technology companies in Silicon Valley started this
experimentation.
Decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) epitomize
organizational decentralization. Launched in May 2016, the first
DAO was set up as an organization based purely on code and
smart contracts. It did not have a conventional corporate structure,
no incorporation, and had no physical address or headquarter. All
traditional control mechanisms employed by principals in agency
relationships had been entirely removed. People who work for the
DAO are subject to a different kind of agency relationship. DAO
workers were engaged in a dynamic set of working relationships
that continuously and dynamically self-organized around projects
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
and outcomes, not corporate hierarchies with implicit hierarchical
biases.
The original DAO has a lasting impact on emerging DAO designs.
It creates core commonalities and associated path dependencies in
futures generations of DAOs. The core common denominator for
all DAO token members is the unifying desire to optimize the
DAO token value. Accordingly, performance assessment in the
DAO structure is based on value optimization not on hierarchical
or political processes. On the upside, token holders and contractors
work towards a common goal of optimizing the DAO and the
token value and non-performance reputational penalties are free
from racial or cultural biases and associated implications as the
token holders are unlikely to even know each other. Yet, the focus
on the value enhancement of fungible tokens can lead to short
termism and may ignore ethical and governance issues.
DAO developers are also subject to path dependencies which
undermine the evolution of decentralized DAO designs. The
communication structures in organizations will invariably
influence future designs.11 While groups of DAO developers
certainly influence DAO designs with their collective assumptions
about how their intended DAO users will engage with the DAO,
the inherent structure and approach of a group of developers
building a software solution typically has an even larger impact on
DAO design. The collective reasoning process of DAO developers
is based largely on their prior experiences with DAO software
solutions which form path dependencies. The impact of such path
dependencies became apparent in the Ethereum developer
community and their attempts at upgrading Ethereum 1.0 to 2.0 in
the late 2010s.
To overcome these shortcomings and path dependencies, the
network of developers that builds decentralized software solutions
11 Conway, Melvin E. (1968). How to Committees Invent? Datamation, 14(5),
28-31. “Organizations which design systems... are constrained to produce
designs which are copies of the communication structures of these
organizations.”
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

and DAOs should be decentralized itself. Human brains naturally
simplify complex systems for the sake of coherence. By contrast,
complex adaptive systems constantly evolve through self-
regulation of self-organizing group behaviors. The decentralized
interaction of DAO developers could help support random
developer interaction and make developer perspectives on
software development more diverse. Epitomizing the participant
design of system software by and for participants, decentralized
software development could support software experiments in
which cultivating or abandoning software takes place in a fluid
state of co-relation coalescing around projects, not in top-down
hierarchical structures. At the beginning of the 2020s, no forum
existed that could support truly decentralized software
development with a sufficient incentive design.
IV. Market Decentralization
Markets of the past evolved through centralized hubs. Historically,
the physical location of hard assets determined trading
relationships. Financial hubs evolved because they were able to
connect interested trading parties that otherwise would not know
of each other. Centralized financial hubs facilitate price discovery
and increase liquidity. For example, connecting the east and west
coasts in the US via the railway system enabled over time the
creation of Chicago as a financial hub. The shipment of hard assets
through Chicago and the need for physical settlement of trades in
hard assets over time established Chicago as a hub for financial
products and derivatives.
Market and economic liberalization policies often result in
privatization and deregulation of formerly government-controlled
functions. Privatization of former government functions shifts the
responsibility for public services and products from the public to
the private sector. Post privatization, the private sector, that is, any
non-government organization such as a private corporation and
businesses, fulfills functions that had prior to the privatization
been the exclusive domain of the government. Examples include
the privatization of the mail and railways, among others.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
Despite the centralized infrastructure of most markets, some
markets were able to evolve without meaningful centralized
coordination. For example, the foreign exchange (FX) market
evolved without centralized coordination because currency trading
did not require a physical location. While a large part of FX
trading takes place on the established exchanges, FX traders can
also use decentralized forms of exchange via the internet for price
quotes from FX dealers around the world. Similarly, over-the-
counter (OTC) markets evolved decentralized because physical
location is not determinative for the trade.
OTC market participants can trade commodities, currencies,
stocks, or other instruments directly, peer-to-peer, electronically
and without a central exchange or broker. Another example is
provided by real estate transactions. While the physical location is
key, real estate transactions are not coordinated through
centralized hubs or clearinghouses.
The digitization of content has made perhaps the most lasting
contribution to the decentralization of markets. The digitization of
content was a natural precursor for platform businesses, internet of
things, and its progeny. The associated digital transformation of
business provided new capabilities, enhanced innovation, and the
creation of new revenue streams. The physical location of assets
becomes less important when more content is digitized and online
and virtual products emerge. As a result, markets are becoming
increasingly decentralized. For example, with the removal of the
traditional trading pits in Chicago and New York City, the move to
electronic trading enabled trading around the clock independent of
physical location of a given trading counterparty.
Internet-based e-commerce has prepared consumers for ever
increasing decentralized forms of commerce. Electronically
buying or selling of products or services over the internet has
changed the economic realities for many countries and boosted
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

new industries. For example, since 2013, almost a quarter of the
Czech Republic’s total turnover is generated via online channels.12
With the emergence of the Bitcoin protocol in 2009, the digital
asset market began to evolve. Until the creation of the first known
alt-coin (e.g. an alternative coin to Bitcoin) around April 15, 2011,
Bitcoin virtually dominated the market and was in fact the only
digital asset. Between 2017 and 2019, the alt-coin market
proliferated significantly. Correspondingly, from 2016 to 2017,
Bitcoin’s market share dropped dramatically. At the end of 2014,
with the instantiation of smart contracting in the Ethereum
ecosystem and the ETH currency, the market for digital assets
started to diversify and proliferate substantially. New alt-coins
emerged almost weekly, leading to over 2000 crytocurrencies in
circulation in late 2018.
Such new cryptocurrencies created a new market for initial coin
offerings (ICOs). The ICO market peaked from March 2018 to
June 2018. The percentage of ICOs in relation to total fundraising
of blockchain startups dropped from 80% to around 35% in
August 2018 and only marginally recovered between September
2018 and February 2019 at around 40% to 50% before dropping to
20% in March 2019. From March 2017 to June 2018, ICOs were
the overwhelmingly dominant fundraising tool for the blockchain
industry. The demise of the ICO market turned the overall trend
away from ICO funding to venture funding in the blockchain
industry.
The emergence of the ICO market changed the market for venture
funding. In the existing venture capital model, venture capital
funds invest significant amounts of money in the hope of finding
the next unicorn start-up. This investment process is subject to
long, complex, and time intensive processes leading up to a late
12 Ecommerce News (June 18, 2013). Ecommerce Contribution in Europe
[Infographic], https://ecommercenews.eu/infographic-ecommerce-contribution-
in-europe/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
liquidity event in the form of an IPO or acquisition. By contrast,
ICOs provide liquidity to investors much faster and allow venture
capital funds to capitalize on existing profits early. Venture capital
funds who invested in crypto start-ups gain access to much earlier
liquidity via ICOs by converting their cryptocurrency profits into
Bitcoin or Ether through any of the cryptocurrency exchanges and
can thereafter transfer into fiat currencies via online services such
as CoinsBank or Coinbase. During the ICO boom years, the
venture capital market in the decentralized technology sector
ground to a halt. In the aftermath of the ICO boom and collapse,
venture funding has become, again, the predominant model for
funding blockchain startups.
Market decentralization via ICOs and other decentralized funding
methods has significant disruptive effects on finance. ICOs
provide lower barriers to entry for a more diverse body of
investors and thus increase the diversity and the heterogeneity of
start-up funding. Through borderless online sales, ICOs are
directly marketed to a worldwide potential pool of investors,
bypassing the typical legal, jurisdictional, and business hurdles in
traditional venture capital financing.13 Moreover, ICOs benefit
from limited accreditation standards, as well as from multiple
global cryptocurrency exchanges that provide continuous access to
trading.14 ICO promoters and their developers are not forced to
sacrifice their equity in the project in exchange for the funds they
raised.
Emerging decentralized technologies further expand the
decentralization of markets. For example, the concept of
tokenization, that is the tokenized instantiation and trade of
physical assets, is an extension of the markets in stock, futures,
and other derivatives. With tokenization, fractional interest in hard
assets, such as art and real estate, can be traded without physical
determinants.
13 Ibid.
14 Sunnarborg, Alex (June 11, 2017). ICO Investments Pass VC Funding in
Blockchain Market First. Coindesk, https://www.coindesk.com/ico-investments-
pass-vc-funding-in-blockchain-market-first (accessed June 1, 2020).
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

Decentralized Cryptocurrency Exchanges (DEX) provide a
prominent example of increasing market decentralization. A DEX
is a peer-to-peer cryptocurrency exchange. In 2019, prominent
DEX included IDex15 and EtherDelta,16 and OAX.17 DEX provide
an instantiation of a core promise of decentralized technology.18
DEX epitomize market decentralization because they allow users
to interact and trade anonymously in a secure environment without
the need for third party intermediation.
DEX can be distinguished from centralized cryptocurrency
exchanges in several key ways. DEX have no centralized nexus or
a jurisdiction where an identified exchange controller could reside.
Users are not required to open a separate wallet on the DEX.
Rather, they trade with other peers directly through their
respective wallets. Settlement is effectuated on a delivery versus
payment basis directly between the respective trading parties.
Proprietary trading intermediaries, such as market makers and
centralized third-party operators, cannot inject themselves in a
transaction. As a result, conflicts and counterparty risks are absent
in a DEX. The ownership of digital assets off-exchange delays
trade execution but ensures higher levels of overall asset security.
Moreover, the fee structure in a DEX is different from a
centralized cryptocurrency exchange which typically charges a
percent of the total value of the transaction. Instead, on a DEX, the
users pay a fee as gas, more akin to a per-trade fee, which is a
fraction of the percent transaction fees charged on centralized
cryptocurrency exchanges. Because a DEX does not centralize
authority over users’ assets, users can sign and start trading
anonymously, that is, without identify verification. Centralized
cryptocurrency exchanges struggle keeping up with know your
15 IDEX, htps://idex.market/eth/idex (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
16 Etherdelta, https://etherdelta.com (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
17 OAX Foundation, https://www.oax.org (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
18 See, e.g., Dai, Wei. "B-Money". Archived from the original on March 28,
2018, http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt (accessed June 1, 2020); May,
Timothy C. (Nov. 24, 1992). The Crypto Anarchist Manifesto, Activism.net,
https://activism.net/cypherpunk/crypto-anarchy.html (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
customer and anti-money laundering rules. Most DEX have been
struggling with liquidity and price discovery.
The code that constitutes the backbone of any DEX provides the
operational rules for the exchange of digital assets between users.
The code replaces the regulatory framework that applies to
centralized cryptocurrency exchanges. Orders on a DEX are
matched and settled through the operational rules provided by the
code. Unlike central order books on centralized exchanges and the
settlement back office that facilitates the finalization of a trade, on
a DEX, the code facilitates the peer-to-peer exchange without the
involvement of any intermediary. The DEX code also allows the
avoidance of any third-party intermediary gateway to facilitate a
given trade. While the creator of a given DEX typically only has a
rather limited role in the evolution of the DEX, the code that
provides the operational rules of the exchange may still be subject
to the centralized control of certain developers. The idea of a
completely open source DEX without any ongoing developer
involvement remains untested. Architecturally, DEX can be seen
as centralized because the DEX code and the operational rules of
the DEX code in effect create the exchange and facilitate a central
order exchange function and price discovery, not a peer-to-peer
exchange.
Despite many of the benefits that derive from its decentralized
exchange model, DEX may not be able to ensure market integrity.
Just like centralized cryptocurrency exchanges provide certain
traders with benefits that may provide them with advantages at the
expense of others traders, the code that creates a DEX may also
allow the asymmetric distribution of trading information based on
user status.19 The code may also create new risks to market
integrity because of its automation and lack of a human backstop
in compliance, back office, and settlement. Wash trading,
frontrunning, and insider trading are risks to market integrity that
19 See Underwood, Barbara D. (Sept. 18, 2018). Virtual Markets: Integrity
Report, Office of the New York State Attorney General,
https://virtualmarkets.ag.ny.gov/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

can materialize on DEX, among other price-manipulation
practices.
V. Governmental Decentralization
Democratic republics and their constitutions are brilliantly
designed systems to maximize freedom and curtail hierarchical
overreach. For example, the Constitution of the United States of
America is intended to facilitate a political order that creates as
much human autonomy as possible. Yet, like any operating
system, constitutional democracies are slowly reaching their
limits. Societal and constitutional change is an iterative piecemeal
process through forms of silent withdrawal, disengagement,
defiance, and truculence of ordinary people.20
Governmental decentralization is incommensurable because of its
different kinds, degrees, or dimensions. Governmental
decentralization describes the process of transference of
responsibility and authority for public functions from centralized
governmental agencies to centrally subordinated but quasi-
independent public or private entities. Governmental
decentralization encapsulates and often overlaps with other forms
of decentralization including: political, administrative, fiscal, and
market decentralization. These permutations of governmental
decentralization may appear in, yet again, different forms,
instantiations, and combinations thereof. What makes matters
even more complex are the heterogeneous geographical locations
of these combined effects of governmental decentralization.
Different forms of governmental decentralization can appear in
different sectors and across country borders while transcending
cultures.
20 Kropotkin, Petr. (1896). The State: Its Historic Role,
https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-state-its-historic-role
(accessed June 1, 2020); Scott, James C. (2012). Two Cheers for Anarchism:
Six Easy Pieces on Autonomy, Dignity, and Meaningful Work and Play.
Princeton; Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
Governmental decentralization appears in different levels of
intensity. For example, de-concentration of centralized
governmental functions can be identified as perhaps the weakest
form of governmental decentralization. In de-concentration, the
centralized governmental functions merely shift to more regional
instantiations of the same function or by way of centralized
supervision of the function in the region. By contrast, delegation is
a heightened form of governmental decentralization because the
central government transfers centralized public functions to a
quasi-autonomous public or private entity. Examples of
governmental delegation include semi-autonomous school
districts, regional development corporations, housing authorities,
transportation authorities, or special service districts. Finally,
governmental decentralization may also consist of devolution.
Devolution of otherwise centralized governmental functions
typically consists of a more complete transfer of authority to quasi
autonomous entities and local governments that have their own
democratic legitimacy and independent sources of funding and
taxing.
The impact of governmental decentralization depends on the
combination of several key factors. The political, fiscal and
administrative arrangements which characterize the
decentralization can differ greatly. For example, private
organizations and local governments can rarely fulfill government
functions effectively if they do not control an adequate level of
revenues. In turn, to be effective, local government control over
revenue needs to be tied to the authority to make decisions about
local government expenditures. The combination of local finance
following local government functions while adhering to local
priorities controlled by overall accountability is key to successful
governmental decentralization. The training of both federal and
local officials in decentralized administration methods is also a
key to the success of government decentralization. In the transition
process, private enterprises and local governments often depend
on technical assistance as well as in the fiscal, planning, and
management of decentralized government functions.
Governmental decentralization can create several improvements
for society. By allowing local experimentation with governance
solutions, government decentralization can lead to more
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

innovative and responsive programs for the greater good of the
citizens and constituents. By facilitating citizens with improved
control over public programs at the local level, government
decentralization can increase political stability and national unity.
It can remove the bottlenecks in decision making that are often
associated with central government planning and simplify
complex bureaucratic procedures. It can create a lasting
improvement in the relationship between the government and its
constituents. Governmental decentralization can result in enhanced
and localized democratization, pluralistic politics, and
representative government. The selection of representatives from
local electoral jurisdictions enables constituents to be more
familiar with their respective political representatives. In turn, it
allows representatives to improve their knowledge of the needs
and desires of their constituents. Local governments can make
decisions with greater participation of their constituents which
may result in better informed and more diverse interests in society
– compared to decisions only made by national political
authorities.
The degree of success in governmental decentralization is often
associated with the level of accountability instituted in the process.
Accountability depends on the availability of information. In the
aftermath of governmental decentralization, politicians and local
officials are more incentivized to be responsive to local needs if a
system of accountability has been instituted based on public or
otherwise available transparent information. The information
enables the community to effectively monitor or react to the
performance of the newly instituted local government.
Governmental decentralization also has several potential
disadvantages. The economic rationale for decentralization and its
impact on equity, efficiency, and macrostability are not always
clear. In fact, decentralization may not always be efficient as
centralized economies of scale create the near-optimal efficiencies
for economic growth. Especially standardized network-based
services are very difficult to improve with decentralized
approaches when the level of technical and administrative know-
how at the local level is suboptimal. This suboptimality is
exacerbated if the local government does not have adequate
financial resources. If instituted despite these shortcomings,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
government decentralization may result in the loss of economies
of scale. Furthermore, government decentralization at the local
level can favor local elites and may overcomplicate the
coordination of national policies.
Affirmative governmental decentralization can take different
forms. Top-down governmental decentralization typically is
initiated by the controlling governmental entity and its center of
authority. Top-down decentralization is often motivated by fiscal
considerations. A federal authority may consider decentralized
solutions in an effort to find additional resources to pay off
government debt or pay for services. By contrast, bottom-up
governmental decentralization can result from regional
governmental units and localities. Bottom-up governmental
decentralization is often a result of an agreed upon combination of
authority between the controlling federal or central government
and their regional counterparts. Bottom-up governmental
decentralization often follows from a realization that local or
regional governmental responsiveness is superior. It increases
local authority participation and often increases long-term political
stability in the region.
Silent governmental decentralization is the process of
decentralization that is not based on explicit policies. While most
political decentralization is based on policy changes and
affirmative reform efforts, silent governmental decentralization
may occur as a result of inevitable changes in policy emphasis,
networks, and resource availability.21 Such silent political change
can lead inevitably to a more decentralized system.
Governmental decentralization often takes place during times of
political or economic crises. The fall of a regime and the resultant
power vacuum often causes power struggles. It is during those
power struggles that forms of political decentralization emerge.
For example, at the end the second decade in the 21st century, the
21 Dubois, Hans F.W. & Fattore, Giovanni (2009). Definitions and Typologies
in Public Administration Research: The Case of Decentralization. International
Journal of Public Administration, 32:8, 704-727.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

increasing crises of legitimacy in politics resulted in
democratically legitimized governmental
decentralization. Political and regulatory decentralization of
society are often public reactions to increasing economic decline,
demands of minorities for a greater say in local governance, the
general weakening legitimacy of the public sector, government’s
inability to fund services, the overall decline in government
services, and global and international pressure on countries with
inefficient, undemocratic, overly centralized systems.
Decentralization reforms of government are typically motivated by
society’s desire to find solutions to new geopolitical problems,
such as the emergence of a new automated workforce that replaces
existing and traditional employment opportunities, the human
migration from Africa to Europe, the disillusionment of large parts
of society with existing political and social institutions, such as the
European Union, the Brexit movement, among many other
political issues that require solutions. Decentralization in the
aftermath of political crises depends on forms of experimentation
with decentralized functions.
Governmental decentralization in combination with increasing
technological and organizational decentralization often
inaugurates regulatory decentralization. For instance, in April
2016, the Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”), the financial
regulatory body in the United Kingdom, broke new ground by
announcing the introduction of a “regulatory sandbox,” which
allows both startups and established companies to roll out and test
new ideas, products, and business models in the area of fintech
(i.e., new technologies aimed at making financial services, ranging
from online lending to digital currencies, more efficient). The idea
behind the sandbox is to provide a safe space for testing
innovative and increasingly decentralized products and services
without being forced to comply with the applicable set of rules and
regulations. With the sandbox, the regulator aims to foster
innovation by lowering regulatory barriers and costs for testing
disruptive innovative technologies, while ensuring that consumers
will not be negatively affected. What makes the regulatory
sandbox so attractive is that, insofar as technology has
consequences that flow into everyday lives, such technology will
be open to discussion and democratic supervision and control. In
this way, public entitlement to participate in regulatory debates
can help to create a renewed sense of legitimacy that justifies the
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
regulation. Given these benefits, other regulatory sandboxes have
been introduced by other regulators, such as the Australian
Securities and Investment Commission (ASIC), Singapore’s
Monetary Authority (MAS) and Abu Dhabi’s Financial Services
Regulatory Authority (FSRA).
With the emergence of decentralized technologies, the role of
the central government is increasingly under attack. For example,
in the early 2020s, the Bitcoin cryptocurrency could not be
controlled or regulated by centralized governments and has
spawned a community effort to find more decentralized
applications that are free from government control. Leading
technologists are experimenting with ideas that would allow new
forms of society that are free from centralized control.
Seasteading, for example, would enable the establishment of
human societies on permanent dwellings on the high sea and
outside the territory claimed by any government. As such,
seasteaders would be able to experiment with new societal
solutions that are not subject to the control and oversight of
centralized governments. In 2020, seasteading is a the very earliest
point of implementation, subject to engineering challenges, and
still largely experimental.
VI. Societal Decentralization
The historical evolution of technology created the foundation for
the emerging societal decentralization. Vast technological
innovation during the industrial revolution resulted in ever
increasing social decentralization. For example, the printing press,
digitization, and the internet allowed knowledge and information
to reach a broader demographic. Similarly, technological
innovations in personal transportation, such as steam engine for
railway travel and the combustion engine for the automobile,
increased personal freedom and social mobility. Social mobility
and access to middle-class life was further enabled through the
decentralization of manufacturing which created increasing
employment opportunities in local areas.
As the broadest extension of technological decentralization, the
internet era gave rise to the most significant societal
decentralization. Communication and commerce were freed of
geographic limitations. At the beginning of 2020, about one fourth
of humanity engaged in virtual communication on social media in
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

some capacity. Social media created a form of social cohesion that
was unprecedented in terms of geographic social interaction.
Views and values could be exchanged and influenced with an
unprecedented geographic reach. Prior marginalized groups can
coordinate their efforts world-wide through online groups that
promote their shared ideas. Social functions that formerly
belonged to local groups were increasingly being fulfilled by
social media exchanges where influence is allocated to the most
popular content and its creator.
Societal boundaries are continuously being shifted via internet-
based knowledge exchange and social media. In the pre-internet
era, knowledge was mostly accumulated by and exchanged with
specialists. Internet-based knowledge sharing helps remove
information silos and information privileges that created societal
structures and privileges. With the dawn of the social media age,
the level of interaction between non-specialists has increased
dramatically, removing hegemony and centralized control
structures over information while creating a more skilled and
knowledgeable work force. For example, micro task work via
Crowdflower and Amazon Mechanical Turk enable lower skilled
or unemployed individuals to earn a living through micro task
work over the internet. Recruitment for such work typically takes
place over social media outlets, that is by word of mouth on social
media channels.
Internet-based collective decision making via the crowd can
replace the centralized coordination functions in society. For
example, in the past, product quality assessments were centrally
disseminated and evaluated on consumer’s behalf, by way of
Consumer Reports, among others. In the social media age,
collective decision making through the power of the crowd is
perhaps the most prevailing method of product evaluation and
forces companies to take heed. Similarly, knowledge and views
from the edges of society can be moved into societal mainstream
very quickly via social media. This transfer can remove existing
societal consensus, social cohesion among established groups, and
order in the process. Otherwise less visible and influential social,
ethical, environmental, political issues can thus gain traction rather
quickly. Traditional modes of coordinating human behavior by
way of political decision making, democratic institutions, business
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
governance, learning, among many others, become slowly less
prevalent.
Societal decentralization is a byproduct of broader societal trends
that derive from the combined feedback effects of decentralization
of science, technological decentralization, organizational
decentralization, as well as market and governmental
decentralization. Such are the precursors of an ever freer and more
open society.22 As each form of decentralization empowers
heightened proliferation of other forms of decentralization,
individuals in society perceive more opportunities for changes in
consumer behavior, silent withdrawal, disengagement, and
defiance of the established centralized order. For example, the
emerging crypto movement that gave rise to a market
capitalization of $800 billion in cryptocurrencies at its heights in
2018 is the outcome of a smaller group in society that experiments
with decentralized technology to effectuate broader societal
change. Through the changes that occur in the day-to-day actions
of ordinary people, societal change and decentralization
materializes as an iterative piecemeal process.23 Changes in
consumer behavior, such as the use of cryptocurrencies, are
possible through the combined effects of types of decentralization.
The coordination of human behavior and the organization of
society are beginning to change with the evolution of the
22 Karl Popper conceptualized the open society before ever knowing how
decentralized systems could help support the evolution of open societal systems.
Popper, Karl (1966). The Open Society and Its Enemies. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press; “An open society has the hidden strength, in
comparison to its authoritarian competitors, of a democratic epistemology. Its
constitutions entrench power, and therefore knowledge, in competing
institutions: the courts, the press, parliaments, oversight bodies, regulators, and
last but not least, universities. It was Popper's great insight that where
knowledge is subjected to competitive evaluation and peer review by
autonomous communities of scholars, theories that genuinely advance human
progress can be tested and improved. The unseen advantage of open societies
over authoritarian ones lies here, in their capacity to innovate, to unleash
creative minds, and to turn their knowledge into insights, products, techniques,
and systems that reduce human suffering and improve our life together.”
Michael Ignatieff, ‘Rethinking Open Society, Introduction
23 See Chapter 2, footnote 21.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

decentralized coordination mechanism. The decentralized
coordination mechanisms, such as protocols, ecosystems, and
platforms are beginning to provide unprecedented democratic
forms of coordination for society. For example, the public’s
disillusionment with existing political institutions’ ability to
address economic hardships that emerged in the aftermath of the
financial crisis of 2008-9 inaugurated a new form of technological
decentralization. As one result, among many, the Bitcoin protocol
emerged in 2009 as an attempt by its founders to provide an
alternative to the shortcomings of the financial system. Bitcoin and
its progeny spawned a slew of additional decentralized protocols
and decentralized technology attempts and solutions that, while
mostly still experimental, provide a gateway to future forms of
technological decentralization. The evolution of decentralized
protocols, ecosystems, and platforms, in turn, may provide
unprecedented democratic forms of organizing society and
coordinating human behavior.
The crypto movement in the late 2010s exemplifies societal
decentralization that results from the feedback effects between
different types of decentralization. The crypto movement
exemplifies the combination of political decentralization,
technological decentralization, market decentralization, and
organizational decentralization. The crypto movement started with
a strong base of followers who believed in a form of crypto
anarchism facilitated by the start of the Bitcoin protocol in 2009.
A strong distrust of government and central banking is part of the
political philosophy of the movement which emerged to create an
alternative to fiat currencies that the movement believed to be
controlled by one-sided political forces via central banks. The
particular political philosophy could not be instantiated without a
form of technological decentralization, that is cryptocurrencies,
which the movement believed to be immune from governmental
control. The combination of political philosophy and technology
created new markets in cryptocurrencies. Most importantly, the
movement also created new forms of organization as it promoted
forms of decentralized autonomous organizations. The combined
factors of decentralization enabled a form of societal
decentralization instilled in the movement as it attempts to create a
separate economy and political philosophy.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
Broader societal trends enable a continuing proliferation of
societal decentralization and separatist movements. The crypto
movement encapsulates only a small fraction of society and
provides only one example. Yet, the societal factors that created
the crypto movement are a reflection of broader societal trends.
For example, the growing distrust of government generally and the
lack of voter participation and disbelief in the core pillars of
democracies result in the increasing disengagement of large parts
of society in the processes of democracy. As a result, alternative
avenues of collective reasoning and decision-making processes are
increasingly needed. The crisis in legitimacy in politics of the
2020s but also by the demise of some of the most centralized
regimes in the world, such as the Soviet Union in the 1990s, are
powerful reminders that the people increasingly seek alternatives
rather than abide by the traditional social norms. People do look
for new systems to replace the established socio-economic
consensus on the engagement with the political establishment in a
given country. Societal decentralization becomes increasingly
prevalent as private sector and citizen participation in governance
are perceived as real alternatives to the established order.24
The decentralized internet impacts societal decentralization.
Attempts to create a decentralized internet may help overcome
existing centralized corporate and political regulation and
influence over web content and the associated societal
coordination. Because the initial vision of the founders of the
internet, to create a truly decentralized network without central
points of failure, could not be fulfilled, the community of internet
idealists has been seeking technological ways to decentralize the
internet. Decentralized encryption technologies that gave rise to
the Bitcoin protocol allow nodes in unidentified networks of
computers to coordinate. Advocates of the technologies believe
that it can be used to re-decentralize the internet. For example, the
founders of Wikipedia are working on a decentralized version of
24 Joint UNDP-Government of Germany (Oct. 1999). Decentralization: A
Sampling of Definitions [Working Paper],
http://web.undp.org/evaluation/documents/decentralization_working_report.PD
F (accessed June 1, 2020).
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

Wikipedia via decentralized encryption technologies.25 If
successful, such attempts could help shift content discovery and
publishing away from corporate controls into the hands of the
internet users as the technology is less prone to corporate and
political influences. Without such centralized elements, societal
coordination could emerge in a more decentralized way.
VII. Feedback Effects
Decentralization manifests itself through feedback loops between
different decentralization phenomena, types of decentralization,
industries affected thereby, and individual action that enables such
decentralization. The often diametrically opposed outcomes of
centralization and decentralization are observable not only in
politics and administration and technology but also in culture, the
economy, as well as in social and industrial organization and
community formation.26 Feedback effects between such social,
economic, and societal phenomena allow decentralized systems to
constantly morph and evolve with new features that, in turn,
generate new feedback loops with existing systems. As one type of
decentralization and its respective constituents proliferates, the
other types are over time increasingly affected, leading to changes
that, in turn, affect each other. The combined effects lead to the
creation of new markets while changing other markets and, over
time, create an emerging new economy. Society at large is affected
at multiple levels because the different constituents that are
affected in their respective fields begin to experiment with their
own applications and decentralized solutions which in turn create
feedback effects for other industries and society at large. Some
may see this as a snowball effect.
25 Knowledge Standards Foundation [ks_found] (2019). Nonprofit Defining
Tech Standards for Encyclopedias [Tweet],
https://twitter.com/ks_found?lang=en (accessed June 1, 2020); Sanger, Larry
(2020) Larry Sanger: Education, Internet, and More, https://larrysanger.org/
(accessed June 1, 2020).
26 Wikipedia. Wilhelm Ropke,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_R%C3%B6pke (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
The core feedback effects that enable decentralization revolve
around technological forms of decentralization and associated
forms of organization, decentralized markets, and overall
emerging societal forms of decentralization. In the aftermath of the
invention of the internet, decentralized technology evolved
through cloud computing, even though the architecture of cloud
computing is fully centralized, and the open source movement.
Technological forms of decentralization via the internet, in turn,
enabled new hybrid forms of organization that thrived through the
combination of centralized control with the bottom-up approach of
decentralization in the form of customer reviews. The evolving
technological decentralization, in turn, has created new markets
and continues to change existing markets. For instance, with the
emergence of the Bitcoin protocol in 2009, the digital asset market
began to evolve. Early forms of consumer buy-in, in turn, allowed
experiments with Decentralized Autonomous Organizations
(DAOs) which have started to challenge the core believe that
governance necessitates agency. Many other examples exist that
illustrate the feedback and knock-on effects between decentralized
technology, organizational decentralization, regulatory
decentralization, and decentralization (and disruption) of
markets. Many other feedback effects are constantly emerging
and affect other parts of society.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

Bibliography
Amidor, Toby (May 10, 2019). Has Nutrition Really Changed
Over the Past 40 Years? U.S.News,
https://health.usnews.com/health-news/blogs/eat-
run/articles/how-the-dietary-guidelines-have-changed
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Brennan, Michael J. (1995). Corporate Finance Over the Past 25
Years. Financial Management, 24(2), 9.
Conway, Melvin E. (1968). How to Committees Invent?
Datamation, 14(5), 28-31.
Dai, Wei. "B-Money". Archived from the original on March 28,
2018, http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt (accessed June 1,
2020); May, Timothy C. (Nov. 24, 1992). The Crypto
Anarchist Manifesto, Activism.net,
https://activism.net/cypherpunk/crypto-anarchy.html (accessed
June 1, 2020).
Dubois, Hans F.W. & Fattore, Giovanni (2009). Definitions and
Typologies in Public Administration Research: The Case of
Decentralization. International Journal of Public
Administration, 32:8, 704-727.
Ecommerce News (June 18, 2013). Infographic: Ecommerce
Contribution in Europe,
https://ecommercenews.eu/infographic-ecommerce-
contribution-in-europe/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Etherdelta, https://etherdelta.com (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
IDEX, htps://idex.market/eth/idex (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
Jensen, Michael C. & Meckling, William H. (1976). Theory of the
Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership
Structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305.
Joint UNDP-Government of Germany (Oct. 1999).
Decentralization: A Sampling of Definitions [Working Paper],
http://web.undp.org/evaluation/documents/decentralization_wo
rking_report.PDF (accessed June 1, 2020).
Kaal, Wulf A. (2014), Evolution of Law: Dynamic Regulation in a
New Institutional Economics Framework. In Wulf A. Kaal
Mattias Schmidt, & Andreas Schwartze (Eds.), Festschrift zu
Ehren von Christian Kirchner. Mohr Siebeck.
Knowledge Standards Foundation [ks_found] (2019). Nonprofit
Defining Tech Standards for Encyclopedias [Tweet],
https://twitter.com/ks_found?lang=en (accessed June 1, 2020).
Kropotkin, Petr. (1896). The State: Its Historic Role,
https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-state-
its-historic-role (accessed June 1, 2020).
Levitt, Steven D.. & Dubner, Steven J. (2006). Freakonomics : A
Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything.
New York: William Morrow.
OAX Foundation, https://www.oax.org (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

DECENTRALIZATION
Popper, Karl (1966). The Open Society and Its Enemies.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
S.H. (June 4, 2014). No Monkey Business? The Economist,
https://www.economist.com/free-exchange/2014/06/04/no-
monkey-business (accessed June 1, 2020).
Sanger, Larry (2020). Larry Sanger: Education, Internet, and
More, https://larrysanger.org/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Scott, James C. (2012). Two Cheers for Anarchism: Six Easy
Pieces on Autonomy, Dignity, and Meaningful Work and Play.
Princeton; Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Shieffer, Andre & Vishny, Robert W. (1997). A Survey of
Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance, 52(2), 737-783.
Sunnarborg, Alex (June 11, 2017). ICO Investments Pass VC
Funding in Blockchain Market First. Coindesk,
https://www.coindesk.com/ico-investments-pass-vc-funding-
in-blockchain-market-first (accessed June 1, 2020).
Thaler, Richard H., & Sunstein, Cass R. (2008). Nudge :
Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Underwood, Barbara D. (Sept. 18, 2018). Virtual Markets:
Integrity Report, Office of the New York State Attorney
General, https://virtualmarkets.ag.ny.gov/ (accessed June 1,
2020).
Wikipedia. Reproducibility Project,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reproducibility_Project
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superforecasting:_The_Art_and_
Science_of_Prediction (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Wilhelm Ropke,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_R%C3%B6pke
(accessed June 1, 2020).
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808852

