BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
WULF A. KAAL* & SAMUEL EVANS†
Abstract
Blockchain technology has the potential to
supplement the existing infrastructure for
securities offerings. After examining the
shortcomings of historical attempts, the article
analyses the redeeming features of blockchain-
based securities offerings including: lower overall
cost structure, substantially reduced settlement
cycle, counter-party risk and systemic risk
reduction, enhanced transparency, among others.
The authors examine the tradeoffs between
opportunities and risks of blockchain-based
securities offerings.
Keywords: Blockchain, Distributed Ledger
Technology, Data Scientists, Meta Models,
Innovation, Private Investment Funds, Crypto
Investments, Crypto Economy, Crypto
Currencies, Diversification, Compliance,
Optimization, Efficiency, Overstock, Securities
Offerings, Federal Securities Regulation
JEL Classification: F33, G15, G23, G28, K22
* Professor, University of Saint Thomas School of Law
(Minneapolis). The authors are grateful for outstanding
assistance provided by research librarians Nicole Kinn.
† Experienced Associate, PriceWaterhouseCooper.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................3
II. OVERSTOCK BLOCKCHAIN SECURITIES OFFERING .................................................6
III. BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY IN SECURITIES OFFERINGS ................................... 12
1. Cost Reduction .............................................................................................. 12
2. Proof of Ownership ....................................................................................... 15
3. Reduced Settlement Cycle .............................................................................. 15
4. Impact on Traditional Market-Participants .................................................... 16
IV. CHALLENGES FOR EXISTING BLOCKCHAIN-BASED OFFERINGS ........................ 19
1. Limited Liquidity ........................................................................................... 19
2. Technology Risk ............................................................................................ 20
V. OVERCOMING REGULATORY UNCERTAINTY ........................................................ 20
1. SEC .............................................................................................................. 22
2. State Law ...................................................................................................... 24
3. SROs............................................................................................................. 27
VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK .......................................................................... 28
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
I. Introduction
One of blockchain technology’s greatest potential application
lies in reforming the securities markets. Blockchain
technology3 allows securities offerings and stock transfers with
all the characteristics of a physical stock transfer, yet the
blockchain enabled stock transfer is completely digitalized and
virtual. The application of blockchain technology in securities
offerings creates unprecedented transparency, legal certainty,
and trust between the contract parties. The technology
substantially reduces the settlement cycle. In the financial
world, a global consensus record of information and
transactions creates the much-needed transparency and, at the
same time, opens global access to finance, including in areas
of the world where the banking system — in contrast to a
mobile telephone network — is not readily available.4
Leading technologists around the world have hailed blockchain
3 A blockchain is a shared digital ledger or database that maintains a
continuously growing list of transactions among participating parties
regarding digital assets – together described as “blocks.” The linear and
chronological order of transactions in a chain will be extended with another
transaction link that is added to the block once such additional transactions
is validated, verified and completed. The chain of transactions is distributed
to a limitless number of participants, so called nodes, around the world in
a public or private peer-to-peer network. The technology provides
significant opportunities and applications in peer-to-peer interactions and
transactions in a decentralized network where all participants are equal and
verification and validation of each transaction is provided by all parties in
the network through the blockchain technology.
4 See, e.g., Michele Chandler, Mobile Banking Takes Off in Nigeria, STAN.
GRAD. SCH. BUS. (Jan. 24, 2012),
https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/mobile-banking-takes-nigeria.;
Cade Metz, Why Bitcoin Will Thrive First in the Developing World, WIRED
(Feb. 2, 2016. 8:00 AM), https://www.wired.com/2016/02/why-bitcoin-
will-thrive-first-in-the-developing-world/. (Noting that in Nigeria, for
example, banking transactions are readily executed over mobile phones
because no infrastructure exists for consumer banking. Donations and aid
to third world countries can finally be provided without the interference of
suboptimal bureaucratic organizations that don’t allocate the aid as
intended by the donor.)
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
technology as one of the most important technological
innovations since the Internet.5 Blockchain technology is
enabled by a distributed ledger that records transactions
efficiently and in a verifiable and permanent way.6 Much of the
media attention has centered on its use to support the issuance
and trading of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies.7 This media
attention is used to inform the average person about a complex
5 Cognizant, et al. The Future of Financial Services: A Global Study of 500
Senior Banking and Insurance Executives by Cognizant, Marketforce and
Pegasystems, PEGASYSTEMS INC. (January 2016) 6, 28-30,
https://www.pega.com/sites/pega.com/files/docs/2016/Jan/the-future-of-
retail-financial-services-study.pdf.; John Naughton, Is Blockchain the Most
Important IT Invention of Our Age?, THE GUARDIAN (Jan. 24, 2016, 4:00
PM),
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/24/blockchain-
bitcoin-technology-most-important-tech-invention-of-our-age-sir-mark-
walport.; William Mougayar, THE BUSINESS OF BLOCKCHAIN: PROMISE,
PRACTICE, AND APPLICATION OF THE NEXT INTERNET TECHNOLOGY
(2016), excerpt reprinted in The Blockchain Is the New Google,
TECHCRUNCH (May 11, 2016), https://techcrunch.com/2016/05/11/the-
blockchain-is-the-new-google/.; Michael Crosby, et al., BlockChain
Technology: Beyond Bitcoin, SUTARDJA CENTER FOR ENTREPRENEURSHIP
& TECHNOLOGY TECHICAL REPORT, 3 (2015), http://scet.berkeley.edu/wp-
content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf.; Kyle Torpey, Why the Bitcoin
Blockchain Is the Biggest Thing Since the Internet, NASDAQ: BITCOIN
MAGAZINE (Apr. 19, 2016), http://www.nasdaq.com/article/why-the-
bitcoin-blockchain-is-the-biggest-thing-since-the-internet-cm608228.;
Carrie Kirby, Andreessen at Coin Summit: Bitcoin Today Is the Internet in
1994, COINDESK (Mar. 25, 2014), http://www.coindesk.com/marc-
andreessen-balaji-srinivasan-discuss-bitcoin/.; Dinis Guarda, Over 50
Bitcoin and Blockchain Thoughts and Quotes You Need to Read,
TRADERSDNA (July 4, 2016), http://www.tradersdna.com/bitcoin-and-
blockchain/over-50-bitcoin-and-blockchain-thoughts-and-quotes-you-
need-to-read/.; Rich Daly, Blockchain: Wall Street’s Most Game-Changing
Technology Advance Since the Internet, FORBES (July 11, 2016),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/richdaly/2016/07/11/blockchain-wall-
streets-most-game-changing-technology-advance-since-the-
internet/#33987a154d87.
6 Marco Iansiti & Karim R. Lakhani, The Truth About Blockchain, HARV.
BUS. REV. (Jan.–Feb. 2017), https://hbr.org/2017/01/the-truth-about-
blockchain.
7Jen Wieczner, Uber Co-Founder and E*Trade Alum Launch No-Fee
Cryptocurrency Trading, FORTUNE: THE LEDGER (July 25, 2018),
http://fortune.com/2018/07/25/cryptocurrency-bitcoin-free-trading-
voyager/.; Nika Goddard, How Does A Cryptocurrency Exchange Work?,
BESTTECHIE (Aug. 17, 2018), https://www.besttechie.com/how-does-a-
cryptocurrency-exchange-work/.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
topic, and only skims the surface of the possibilities blockchain
has to offer.
Existing forms of ledger structures applicable to securities
offerings are subject to significant shortcomings: While for
individual firms, batch-processing is the norm, this model
creates numerous dependencies, multi-day settlement times,
unique operational risks, and duplicative costs. Legacy
systems in which multiple firms are trading the same securities
utilize multiple ledgers which increases operational risks and
increases costs.
In December of 2015, Overstock.com (“OSTK”), a publicly
traded online retailer based in Utah, offered its securities in a
$30 million private offering that utilized blockchain
technology.8 The Overstock.com blockchain-enabled
securities offering is a key precedent for future blockchain
enabled securities offerings. It also highlights the possibility of
and demand for securities offerings that are outside of the
traditional securities offering schemes available under the
federal securities laws.
The Overstock offering provides important guidance for future
use of blockchain technology in securities offering and
highlights the need for upgrading the regulatory infrastructure
to catch-up with innovation. The Overstock offering suggests
that several measures could help optimize the regulatory
infrastructure for future securities offerings involving
blockchain technology and crypto investments. These
measures mainly pertain to agency cost involved in buying or
selling shares of a company.
This article examines the existing blockchain-based securities
offerings, reviews associated opportunities, and provides
8 Overstock.com, Correspondence Regarding Amendment no. 1 to
Registration Statement (Form S-3/A) (Jul. 31, 2015) (In the Overstock
offering, there was an allowance for a certain number of digital shares to
be issued and a certain amount of traditional shares to be issued. Not all
possible digital shares were issued and therefore, they remain on the shelf
to be taken down at a later date.),
https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1130713/000110465915055326
/filename1.htm
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
general guidance on possible optimization metrics that may be
necessitated by the shortcomings of the existing regulatory
infrastructure for securities offerings and the increasing market
demand for securities/coin offerings that take place outside of
the existing regulatory infrastructure.
II. Overstock Blockchain Securities Offering
The Overstock offering challenges traditional concepts of
issuing and exchanging securities in the United States.
Historically, public corporations have issued paper stock that
would later be traded on the secondary market. Brokers would
record sells and trades by hand every time they made a trade.
This manual process evolved into virtual stock certificates and
later electronic trading over the internet. OSTK’s offering is
the first to trade partially over the blockchain, inaugurating a
new era of securities offerings.
OSTK issued the first Securities and Exchange Commission
(“SEC”) registered “digital securities” that utilizes blockchain
technology. The OSTK offering illustrates the potential
disruptiveness of blockchain technology to the (i) longstanding
processes by which securities are offered and sold to the public
in the U.S., and (ii) traditional roles played by those involved
in the securities offering process e.g., underwriters, transfer
agents, custodians, etc., including through disintermediation.
Because the OSTK offering was conducted by a public
company as part of a shelf registration,9 it creates a model
illustrating the potential benefits of blockchain technology in
securities offerings, and highlights the numerous material
regulatory gaps that exist in the U.S. Only by creating more
legal certainty will blockchain security trading reach maturity.
9 When a corporation seeks to utilize a shelf offering, they are looking
create the public securities, but offer them at a later date. These securities
offered to the public can be new securities (“primary offering”), resales of
outstanding (“secondary offering”) or a combination of both with regards
to a shelf offering. The securities being held for a later date are considered
to be sitting on the shelf with the possibility of being taken down (offered)
at any moment. This streamlines the process by allowing for multiple
offerings under a single registration. SEC RULE 415 SEC Manual of
Publicly Available Telephone Interpretations, Sec. Act Rule 415 (Jul,
1997), https://www.sec.gov/interps/telephone/cftelinterps_rule415.pdf
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
In December of 2015, OSTK, a publicly traded online retailer
based in Utah, completed an offering of securities on the
bitcoin blockchain [(“digital securities”)].10 Ultimately, the
offering netted $30 million, which, on the surface, would not
traditionally justify the cost OSTK poured into the first-of-its-
kind offering. However, OSTK had ulterior motives, chief of
which was Medici Ventures (“Medici”), OSTK’s wholly
owned subsidiary and proprietor of technology centred around
the blockchain. Medici’s t0.com (“t0”) software, named for the
instant settlement and clearing, compared with the industry
standard of three days (T+3), provides the technology needed
to complete an offering of securities on the blockchain. By
completing its own public shelf offering, OSTK had a use case
for the t0 technology and showed they were willing to use their
own products, attesting to the quality, and publicly
documented the process.11
The legal mechanisms in the OSTK offering are highly
innovative. OSTK blockchain shares trade on a registered
alternative trading system (“ATS”) and only one broker-dealer
had access to trade the shares. Each purchaser of OSTK shares
was required to open an online brokerage account with a
broker-dealer subscriber to t0 that was licensed to trade
securities.12 Keystone Capital Corporation is the sole broker-
dealer authorized to provide investors with access to the Series
A Preferred shares through the PRO Securities ATS
(“PRO”).13 At the time of the first OSTK trade, the broker
10Press Release, Overstock.com, Overstock.com Launches Offering of
World’s First Cryptosecurity, GLOBENEWSWIRE, (June 5, 2015),
https://www.globenewswire.com/news-
release/2015/06/05/742576/10137582/en/Overstock-com-Launches-
Offering-of-World-s-First-Cryptosecurity.html.
11About fifteen years ago, OSTK shares were allegedly subject to an illegal
“out-of-the-box short” whereby an investment bank lent out shares that
didn’t exist so that its clients may short OSTK. The result is unfair
manipulation driving the price of the stock down. This tactic is only
possible because it takes three days to settle a trade. By eliminating the
window between trade and settlement, the blockchain eliminates out-of-
the-box shorting.
12Overstock.com, supra note 8.
13Overstock.com, Prospectus (Form 242B2) 5 (Aug. 9, 2018).
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
would be responsible for all “know your customer” rules and
regulations.14 The core difference between the OSTK offering
and a traditional securities offering is that the purchaser of
OSTK must hold the record directly and as beneficial owner of
the securities could not delegate the authority to hold the
securities to the broker, e.g. the securities were held directly
and not in the “street name”15.16
t0 is the software being used to run PRO. PRO currently
operates under a waiver from the SEC, which permits the
trading of blockchain securities. At the start of the issuance,
only accredited investors17 were allowed to trade over the
platform. Many in the brokerage industry hope these digital
securities will eventually be offered over a public exchange as
opposed to strictly on an ATS because of the ATS exclusivity.
ATS were designed specifically for institutional investors to
liquidate their interest. In 1998, the SEC adopted Regulation
ATS in an effort to drive market innovation as well as protect
investor. By registering as an ATS, the trading system would
operate under an exemption to Section 5 of the Securities and
Exchange Act of 1934.18 Traditionally, large investment banks
have created ATS’s (Goldman Sachs— SIGMA X, Credit
Suisse — CrossFinder, Deutsche Bank — SuperX, etc.) for the
purpose of executing large block orders and thus creating
liquidity in the market.19
14Overstock.com, supra note 8.
15 Street name traditionally refers to when a broker is shown as the owner
of the security for the posting purposes as opposed to the beneficial owner.
16Overstock.com, Annual Report (Form 10-K) (March 15, 2018).
17 17 C.F.R. § 230.501(a)(6). (An accredited investor is an individual that
has income in excess of 200,000 in each of the last two years or $300,000
in joint income with ones spouse with the anticipation of reaching the same
income in the future. An individual will also be considered an accredited
investor if their net worth exceeds $1 million.)
18 15 U.S.C. § 78e.
19 If an institution would like to divest itself of an investment that they hold
a large ownership in (say 20% of a public corporation), they cannot go to
the normal market and flood the market with sell orders. If they did this, the
market for that stock would substantially drop because supply is increasing.
Therefore, institutions will trade in dark pools to avoid identity disclosure
and posting of the transaction volume and price.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
Registering as an ATS means broker-dealer laws and
regulations apply, not exchange laws and regulations.20 The
general process involves registering as a broker-dealer and
filing a Form ATS with the SEC.21 By filing Form ATS with
the SEC, the ATS is giving general notice of its operations
required under the law.22 ATS laws and regulations are set out
and enforced by the SEC and the Financial Industry Regulatory
Authority.23 Compliance requirements include fees,24
consumer protection,25 examination,26 and books and records.27
ATS compliance costs are typically cost prohibitive for
startups.
Traditionally, only trades required to be posted are other trades
on exchanges.28 ATS’s are regulated under 15 U.S.C § 78e
exempting them from NMS disclosure rules.29 By creating an
ATS that trades securities over blockchain, there is no latency
in price discovery, which has traditionally been a criticism of
the ATS system. This is because every trade is posted to a
public ledger to which everyone has access. This allows others
in the community to see the quantity of the amounts being
traded without necessarily seeing what was given as
consideration. An ATS system was used to execute the first
registered security offering.
OSTK began the process of the first public blockchain equity
offering in March of 2014 with the announcement of creating
its subsidiary Medici.30 In June and July of 2015, OSTK
20 17 C.F.R. § 242.301.
21 17 C.F.R. § 242.301(b)(1).
22 17 C.F.R. § 242.301(b)(2)(i).
23 17 C.F.R. § 242.301(b)(7).
24 17 C.F.R. § 242.301(b)(4).
25 SEC Rule 15c3–3.
26 ATS’s are subject to examination by FINRA to assure complete
compliance measures are being met.
27 The books and records requirements require the maintaining and
preservation of books and records by the ATS.
28 17 C.F.R. § 242.601(a).
29 15 U.S.C. § 78e.
30 Press Release, Overstock.com, Blockchain Pioneer Medici Ventures
Invests in Factom, Inc., OVERSTOCK.COM, (Feb. 7, 2017),
http://investors.overstock.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=131091&p=irol-
newsArticle&ID=2243816) [https://perma.cc/42CU-9J2J].
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
completed the private offering of two crypto-bonds pursuant to
rule 506(c) of Regulation D. Through a regulation D offering,
OSTK issued $25 million in bonds over t0, which marked the
first time a security was traded over the blockchain. Overstock
executives view this as a stepping stone to being able to trade
securities over the blockchain.
After a successful digital bond trade, Overstock shifted its
sights to trading stock of its company over the blockchain. In
anticipation of its first stock security trade, OSTK filed a shelf
registration statement on its Form S-3 in April of 2015.31 In the
following months, Overstock would work with the SEC to
assure regulatory compliance with all securities offering laws.
In December of 2015 the S-3 was declared effective for the
crypto-security, a class of Series A stock identical to the
common stock, traded on the public exchange except for a
preferential right to an annual dividend of 1% of the
subscription price. Overstock was allowed to issue up to $500
million in securities but limited the portion allowed to be
traded as digital securities.32
In March 2016, the company announced its intention to offer
the first public offering of registered securities using
blockchain technology. In December of 2016 Overstock
completed a seasoned equity offering33 of $10.9 million, which
included $1.9 million of digital securities. In the end, fifty-five
investors bought 126,565 Series A blockchain shares at $15.67
per share, which were traded over t0.34 By allowing for these
securities to be traded over the blockchain, the SEC endorsed
the possibility that trades could be mathematically validated
through a decentralized publicly available system. This also
31 See Overstock.com, Inc., Registration Statement (Form S-3) (April 24,
2015).
32 Id.
33 A seasoned equity offering (“SEO”) refers to a subsequent issuance of
shares at par by a publicly traded company. During an SEO, the company
is looking to raise money from investors by selling additional shares. By
issuing additional shares, the company is able to pay down debt, fund
operations, recapitalize the business, increase working capital or generate
cash to acquire another corporation.
34 Michael del Castillo, Overstock Just Closed its First Day of Trading,
COINDESK, (Dec. 19, 2016, 4:57 PM),
https://www.coindesk.com/overstock-first-day-blockchain-stock-trading.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
provides a model for other trading systems to enable trading of
digital securities.
The securities offered on PRO differ from the other secondary
market blockchain based providers in that the PRO platform
are offered to the public and the Linq are private. In October of
2015, Nasdaq launched its Linq project as part of Nasdaq
private market group, which is seen more as a management tool
for private offerings. In December of 2015, Nasdaq Linq
completed the first private company security transaction,
which was seen as a step forward for the industry. Because
these are private offerings, the public will never have the
opportunity to interact with the system.
Although the OSTK offering was the first public offering,
other companies had created other security instruments to trade
prior to the OSTK offering. One of the earliest adopters in the
digital securities space was Symbiont. In August of 2015,
Symbiont was the first company to create a use case involving
debt instruments, syndicated instruments and private equity.35
In 2015, the OSTK blockchain offering36 was followed by the
launch of Linq, a blockchain-based market for the issuance and
trading of privately placed securities.37 Linq was seen as more
of a data management tool that can be used to verify ownership
changes. In contrast to Linq-based offerings, the OSTK
offering was intended to support trading of securities which
were part of a registered offering, and potentially in a broader
market not limited to “accredited investors” or “qualified
purchasers” of privately placed securities.38 To effect its
offering, OSTK implemented a marginally more advanced
process requiring that investors purchase the securities through
a broker-dealer, and trade the securities through an ATS; but
the structure in other important respects was otherwise
35SquareTwo Financial Corp., Annual Report (Form 10-K) (April 25,
2016).
36 Overstock, supra note 10.
37Press Release, Nasdaq, Nasdaq Linq Enables First-Ever Private
Securities Issuance Documented with Blockchain Technology, NASDAQ,
(Dec. 20, 2015), http://ir.nasdaq.com/news-releases/news-release-
details/nasdaq-linq-enables-first-ever-private-securities-issuance.
38See note 16 Overstock.com, Annual Report.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
materially similar to the structure utilized to purchase and trade
privately placed securities through Linq.
Although the STKO offering provides many valuable lessons
on what it takes to modernize the existing market and trading
infrastructure, it really is only an early vision of what it will
take to develop a fully modernized trading system. For
instance, all existing broker-dealer customer agreements
included provisions which allows the broker-dealer to share the
identity of the customer. Ideally, the privacy of the individual
would be contained.
III. Blockchain Technology in Securities Offerings
Blockchain technology offers a number of attractive features
to potential issuers of securities. Benefits to issuers, and to
those who process trades in the offering after-market, include
lower issuing, operating and administrative costs. The OSTK
offering provides a prominent example for the tradeoffs
between the benefits and risks associated with blockchain-
based securities offerings.
Several large securities trading and brokerage institutions have
already started to experiment with trading over the blockchain.
These institutions include BTL energy, Barclays and a joint
project between IBM and Northern Trust.39 Several other
industry groups have been established to date to develop /
launch blockchain-based initiatives potentially relevant to the
securities industry (e.g., R3, EEA, etc.). Each entity has taken
a different approach to the issuance of securities over the
blockchain, however, none of these trades have been subject to
SEC or CFTC regulation. The existing projects also are not
subject to an environment in which the prices must be posted
real-time to a public (retail) market.
1. Cost Reduction
39 e.g., Enerchain and BTL energy trading platform, Barclays derivative
trading, Northern Trust / IBM joint fund administration project, 28-bank
SWIFT real-time account reconciliation project, etc.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
Blockchain technology is strategically positioned to disrupt the
traditional securities issuance method because of its cost
saving properties.40 The steadily rising cost of securities
issuances41 result in corporations’ efforts to seek technology
driven opportunities for cost savings.
Blockchain technology allows corporations to eliminate costs
associated with human errors in record keeping. Blockchain
eliminates the possibility of transactions being misreported due
to human error that can cause irreparable harm. By eliminating
any accounting error or need for an accuracy review, the
40 Corporations can use two types of blockchains. The first is a public
blockchain. A public blockchain allows anyone to have access to the
network. By allowing anyone access, transactions are readily reviewable
by anyone in the network. This includes government or private party who
would like access to company financials. In the event a corporation does
not want these records to be publicly available, they can create a private
blockchain. A private blockchain requires a system of governance to
access. Therefore, access to transaction records can be screened by the
corporation. Embracing private blockchains allows enterprises to
experiment with the technology in a transitional period. Given the
uncertainties and cost associated with technology upgrades and change,
most corporations are apprehensive about the adoption of blockchain
technology as a whole. By setting companies up on private blockchains,
companies can experiment with the technology which allows them to be
better positioned when mass adoption occurs while keeping cost relatively
low.
41 Issuing publicly traded securities is a milestone for any corporations.
Many considerations such as timing, number of shares offered, and pricing
are carefully considered in making the determination. If successful,
massive amounts of cash can be raised to further operations and drive
corporate growth. In other cases, if an IPO is unsuccessful, share price will
be in freefall immediately after. The Benefits that come from being a
publicly traded corporation are numerous and extensive. Some of the major
benefits include easy access to capital, exit strategy for private equity firms
and improvement in debt financing terms. All of these benefits go towards
increasing value for pre-IPO shareholders. There are however great agency
costs associated with going public. In traditional corporate practice, the
board of directors determine whether and when to hold an IPO. This will
be determined by a formal resolution of the board and will require a high
number of approval votes determined in the articles of incorporation. After
approval, teams of bankers, accountants and lawyers are retained to
facilitate the transition. These agents start the tedious process of creating a
prospectus, getting SEC approval, finalizing financials, due diligence
investigation and determining offering size and price. All of this work is
reviewed at multiple level, which increases the agency transaction cost
exponentially.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
agency cost of transactions drops significantly, benefitting the
corporation’s overall cost of issuing securities.
Blockchain technology may help remedy certain core
shortcomings of legacy systems. For individual firms in legacy
systems batch-processing is the norm, but this model creates
numerous dependencies, multi-day settlement times, unique
operational risks, and duplicative costs, among other
shortcomings.
Trading the same securities across multiple firms requires
multiple ledgers in legacy systems which increase operational
risks and costs. Blockchain technology enables a single fully
transparent ledger that provides cost reduction and counter-
party risk reduction. In particular, credit risk is reduced
because cash (if selling) or the securities (if purchasing) are in
the account for verification shortly after the trade (which could
be seconds, if not fractions of a second), because the settlement
cycle is substantially reduced. Moreover, it is possible that
reconciliation errors associated with trading are greatly
reduced.
Finally, the OSTK offering highlights several features that
enable agency cost removal in securities offerings at an
unprecedented level. In the first OSTK transaction, the
individuals did not hold the stock in the street name. Having
the stock not held in street name cuts out unnecessary agency
cost, which will be passed on to the beneficial owner.
Traditionally, when someone holds stock in street name, the
physical paper stock is held at the Depository Trust
Corporation (DTC). The broker acts as the individual owner’s
agent by keeping record of the beneficial owner’s ownership.
In the OSTK case, the individual is the direct owner of the
stock and the stock is not being held by any third party. By
establishing a system that makes the DTC obsolete, agency
costs have the potential to be cut and clarity surrounding
ownership will increase.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
Another agent that could be eliminated by the blockchain-
based trading system is the transfer agent.42 In blockchain-
based trading models, transfer agents will not be needed
because every task they preform can be automated through
coding. For example, one core function transfer agents preform
is maintain the holding record. This is not necessary because
all trades are recorded on the blockchain where a record is
already being created by design.
2. Proof of Ownership
In the securities trading context, blockchain could provide
indisputable proof of current ownership of “digital securities,”
any transaction in those shares, and the resulting changes in
ownership of the shares, in a form that is available to multiple
securities market participants (e.g., investors, brokers,
regulators).
One of the key features of using blockchain technology is the
elimination of the double spending problem. Every time a
digital asset would be traded, the buyer would be assured that
they are being given the asset and no other individual has a
claim to that same asset. Theoretically, the double spending
problem has not been completely eradicated. There is the
possibility a group or syndicate could gain 51% control over
the network and would therefore be able to reverse transactions
and create a private blockchain, which the market could only
limitedly discern as not real. To date, no one has ever had
control over 51% of a decentralized network.
3. Reduced Settlement Cycle
The regulators may benefit through direct access to real-time
trading information and real time information without delay.
Today the settlement cycle for most transactions is based on a
T+2 regime where there is a two-day delay before any
settlement needs to be recoded. In the vision of where the
42U.S. SEC, TRANSFER AGENTS (April 28, 2016),
https://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/mrtransfer.shtml. (Transfer
agents record change the ownership, maintain issuers security holding
records, cancel and issue certificates and distribute dividend.)
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
technology can be one day, settlement is potentially instantly
posted to the ledger and is perfectly recorded each time. By
shifting to trading securities on a distributive ledger, a T+0
settlement schedule may be possible at some point. Settlement
may be accomplished in seconds not days.
Settlement within T+0 has many positive implications. Most
importantly, any settlement that takes less than 10 seconds, if
ever achieved in any setting, removes counterparty risk and
with it systemic risk entirely. Arguably the entire regulatory
infrastructure that has been tailored to address counterparty-
and systemic risk would need to be reformed if settlement
finality can be increased to the seconds range with blockchain
technology. Settlement within 10 seconds would remove the
need for most systemic risk regulation and counterparty risk-
based regulation.
Another benefit of blockchain is the ability to drastically
reduce the cost of the settlement infrastructure. Traditionally,
settlement disputes involved going to court and going through
the motion practice. Yet, more than 90% of cases are settled by
the parties individually or by way of some other sort of
alternative dispute resolution mechanism. In every step of the
settlement cycle, there are agency fees including filing fees,
mediator, arbitrator and attorney fees. Traditionally, mediators
and arbitrators are treated by the courts as cost saving
measures, but still further inflate the agency transactional cost.
Blockchain presents a unique opportunity to reduce or
eliminate these transactional costs entirely. These transaction
costs are eliminated by use of immutable ledger technology or
greatly reduced by the availability of oracles.
Transaction costs can be eliminated by blockchain because
each token or tokenized piece of property have a unique value
the requires proof of ownership through: 1. Counter-party and
other forms of risk reduction (relative to trading of issued
securities), 2. Increased investor (and potentially regulator)
transparency, 3. Transnational (“boundary-less”) trading.
4. Impact on Traditional Market-Participants
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
A public offering of securities involves numerous market-
participants, beyond simply investors to purchase the securities
being issued. These “traditional” market-participants include,
among others, underwriters, syndicate firms, transfer agents,
custodians, and DTC / Cede & Co.
The potential cost-reductions for issuers and other effects of
blockchain-based offerings could affect these actors in
different ways: they may be forced to reduce their respective
roles, cease providing the services they have traditionally
offered, or construct their own blockchain platforms (i.e.,
innovate) to support blockchain-based offerings.
Some examples of potentially affected roles include: 1.
Underwriter;43 Syndicate; Exchanges; Market-making;
Transfer agent,44 Custodians; and DTC / Cede & Co.45
Moreover, several examples illustrate potentially affected
functions “After the Trade”: 1. Trading / execution; 2. Trade
settlement; 3. Trade confirmations; 4. Corporate actions (e.g.,
dividends); 5. Securities custody; and 6. Reporting (to the SEC
/ public).
The OSTK offering highlights blockchain technology’s impact
on the role played by DTC / Cede & Co. Traditionally, when
someone holds stock in street name, the physical paper stock is
held at the Depository Trust Corporation (DTC). The broker
acts as the individual owner’s agent by keeping record of the
beneficial owner’s ownership. In the OSTK case, the
individual is the direct owner of the stock and the stock is not
being held by any third party. Accordingly, the OSTK offering
demonstrates that DTC’s role in securities offerings can be
called into question.
43Craig Calcaterra, Wulf A. Kaal, & Vadhindran K. Rao, Decentralized
Underwriting, (Jun. 13, 2019 (unpublished paper),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3396542.
44 see, e.g., 34-76743 (December 22, 2015) (seeking comments on
utilization of blockchain in transfer agent / other roles).
45 e.g., book-entry system is eliminated; the ledger itself exists to evidence
the shares and ownership of the shares). If all trading activity were done
through the blockchain their role would disappear.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
In traditional securities offerings, transfer agents record and
change the securities ownership, maintain issuers security
holding records, cancel and issue certificates and distribute
dividend.46 In blockchain-based trading models, transfer
agents will be needed much less or potentially not at all be
needed because every task transfer agents may perform can be
automated through coding. For example, one core function
transfer agents preform is maintain the holding record. This is
not necessary because all trades are recorded on the
blockchain.
Instant settlement systems provided by blockchain technology
change business practices. For instance, the t+3 system allows
for a grace period before settlement is required. Without this
grace period in a blockchain-based settlement system,
institutional investors will no longer be able to lend their idle
shares to investors to cover short positions.
Another business practice affected by blockchain technology
is the net-and-compress model utilized by post trade service
providers.47 These providers use what is called a "net and
compress" model for large investors, which means not every
trade needs to be processed.48 According to some estimates, if
every trade needs to be processed, providers would need to
process an additional 2.9 million orders a day.49 Instantaneous
clearing and settlement may at some point in the future be
accomplished by blockchain technology. Net-and-compress
may then no longer be needed as all trades can be processed in
a timely fashion.
46 See note 42 at U.S. SEC, Transfer Agents.
47 Anna Irrera, 5 Problems with Using Blockchain To Speed Up Share
Trading, MARKETWATCH (Feb. 22, 2016, 12:44
PM), https://www.marketwatch.com/story/5-problems-with-using-
blockchain-to-speed-up-share-trading-2016-02-22.
48 Id.
49Michael Mainelli & Alistair Milne, The Impact and Potential of
Blockchain on the Securities Transaction Lifecycle 28 (SWIFT Institute
Working Paper No. 2015-007,
2016), https://swiftinstitute.org/research/the-impact-and-potential-on-the-
securities-transaction-lifecycle/.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
IV. Challenges for Existing Blockchain-Based Offerings
The OSTK offering provides several insights as to missing
elements of blockchain-based offerings. Neither the OSTK
offering nor any of the LINQ-based offerings were structured
to support widespread ownership or trading of securities
through blockchain. For example, no major exchange or inter-
dealer market permits, or will permit in the foreseeable future,
trading of securities issued through blockchain. In this regard,
the OSTK offering, because it was effected by a public
company as part of a shelf registration, is an effective vehicle
for illustrating the potential benefits of blockchain technology
in securities offerings, and for highlighting the numerous
material regulatory gaps that exist before blockchain-based
public offerings of securities can be implemented in the U.S.
The OSTK offering also illustrates the potential disruptiveness
of blockchain technology to the (i) longstanding processes by
which securities are offered and sold to the public in the U.S.,
and (ii) traditional roles played by those involved in the
securities offering process (e.g., underwriters, transfer agents,
custodians, etc.), including through disintermediation.
1. Limited Liquidity
Several additional risks are associated with the limited trading
and associated limited material liquidity that results from a
blockchain-based offering involving only one broker. The
unique risks that result from the OSTK offering structure
include following: 1. Limited opportunities for price
discovery, 2. No market-making means less liquidity (e.g.,
fewer sellers in an appreciating market, and fewer purchasers
in a declining market, etc.), 3. Limited opportunities for short-
selling (and, relatedly, for stock loan / stock borrowing), which
helps in price discovery, 4. Limitations on an investment
manager’s or broker’s ability to discharge its best execution
obligations, 5. No “print” to a tape or national exchange, which
means that there are perpetual questions regarding the market
value of the “digital securities” in a limited trading
environment, 6. Potential limitations on fiduciary and nominee
account structures, which could limit the ability of investors to
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
use tax-deferred accounts (e.g., 401(k)s, IRAs, etc.) to
purchase “digital securities.”
2. Technology Risk
Technology-based risks of blockchain-based offerings are
significant. Technology-based risks include risks from the
design and functioning of code, and from third-party
intrusions. Such risks are generally not present in a traditional
offering. The relative unsophistication of the regulators and the
lack of regulators’ understanding of the technology could
result in an over-reaction which in turn can precipitate creating
new / expanding existing regulations. Similarly, limited
customer / investor understanding of the technology creates
risks associated with the use of the technology in an offering
context. Such risks cannot really be quantified and undermine
the evolution of blockchain-based offerings.
V. Overcoming Regulatory Uncertainty
Issuers of a blockchain-based offering face several federal
securities law issues and associated regulatory uncertainty.
According to a recent survey the number one concern of
businesses entering the blockchain ecosystem involves
regulatory uncertainty.50
For example, if a business would like to release a token tied to
a certain asset, they may run into security law issues on
whether or not registration is required. In today’s regulatory
climate, early adopters are left trying to apply traditional law
to innovation and are unable to acquire a level of certainty they
are comfortable with. As a result, there is a chilling effect over
the industry where legacy businesses are weary to adopt
because of regulatory uncertainty.
The OSTK offering helps to identify specific state and federal
law / regulation challenges, including: 1. The lack of
recognition of “digital” securities under any state’s current
corporation law (but, as mentioned above, this gap is being
50 PwC Study showing what the concerns are surrounding blockchain.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
addressed in Delaware), 2. The lack of recognition of “digital”
securities under any state’s current commercial law,51 which is
relevant for margin / pledging securities as collateral, 3. Legal
uncertainty regarding finality of “settlement” in blockchain-
based offering transactions, 4. Operation and functioning of
ATS, and 5. The operation / functioning of broker-dealers.
Regulatory challenges associated with blockchain-based
offerings may be in part addressed by revising several federal
securities law provisions to allow: (i) recognition of “digital
securities,” (ii) broad-based trading of equity-equivalent
“digital securities,” and (iii) margining of “digital securities.”
The combined effect of regulatory risks associated with
blockchain based offerings can be estimated by considering the
following factors: 1. SEC has not identified or developed any
blockchain-specific offering disclosure standards, or provided
guidance, 2. SEC has not identified or developed any retail
investor-protection measures unique / particular to blockchain-
based offerings, 3. It is not clear that the current form of SEC
and FINRA record-retention rules applicable to broker-dealers,
or the SEC record-retention rules applicable to investment
managers, currently include records relating to the ownership,
trading, or custody of “digital securities.” 4. Structure avoids
risk-mitigation roles performed by third-parties involved in
“ordinary” offering: potential / actual loss of access to market
/ offering expertise for transactions that do not involve an
underwriter / investment banker, 5. Potential application of
“money-transfer” regulations to person operating the
blockchain, 6. Rule 144 potentially unavailable to issuer
“affiliates” and those who purchase from them. Rule 144
allows for the resale of restricted and control securities if a
number of conditions are met, 7. Settlement-related issues
(e.g., no practical ability to correct trade errors because of
same-day / near-instant settlement versus T+3 / T+2 structure).
In most cases, settlement occurs in T+2 or T+3. This delay in
the settlement cycle leads to trading violations that could
otherwise be avoided, 8. Netting risk for brokers, 9. Limited (if
51 Uunder each state’s codification of UCC, The Uniform Law Commission
is currently working on integrating blockchain-based provisions into the
UCC and its commentary.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
any) Section 13 reporting. Under the Securities and Exchange
Act of 1934, if any person or group owns 5% or more of the
issued or outstanding section 13 securities, such beneficial
ownership must be reported on a schedule 13D/13G., 10.
Names of holders potentially discoverable under Delaware and
other states’ laws, 11. Potential IRS uncertainty regarding
classification of securities as “common stock.”
1. SEC
The SEC has started to evaluate the application of blockchain
technology in the financial services industry. In November of
2015, Commissioner Stein commented on blockchain’s
potential for tracing securities lending, repo, and margin
financing and monitoring systemic risk.52 Commissioner Stein
cautioned, however, that as blockchain becomes more fluent in
the market “regulators need to be in a position to lead,
harnessing its benefits and responding quickly to potential
weaknesses.”53 With these comments, individuals who follow
the SECs stance on cryptocurrency were hopeful of early
regulatory adoption to determine how this technology would
be treated under the law.
Despite this early cautioning and call for action, the SEC has
not yet addressed core issues pertaining to the recognition of
blockchain technology applications in finance. Guidance is
especially needed regarding the recognition and application of
crypto-currencies, tokens as securities, and decentralized
autonomous organizations (DAOs) as investment advisers,
among many other issues pertaining to blockchain applications
or derivatives that are applied in finance.
52 Kara M. Stein, Commissioner, U.S. SEC, Remarks at the Harvard Law
School Fidelity Guest Lecture Series: Surfing the Wave: Technology,
Innovation, and Competition (Nov. 9, 2015),
https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/surfing-wave-technology-innovation-
and-competition-remarks-harvard-law-schools-fidelity.; FINANCIAL
STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL: ANNUAL REPORT 2016 (June 21, 2016),
https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/studies-
reports/Documents/FSOC%202016%20Annual%20Report.pdf.
53 Stein, supra note 53.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
SEC recognition of the most basic crypto-currency features is
uncertain. In early 2016, in a significant setback for crypto-
currencies and the crypto-currency industry, the SEC rejected
the Winklevoss twins’ application to establish an exchange
traded fund (ETF) that was intended to invest in Bitcoin
exclusively.54 To allow individuals to invest in Bitcoin without
creating a Bitcoin wallet, the proposed ETF had been intended
to serve as a dollar-denominated proxy pegged to the price of
Bitcoin.55 In rejecting the application, the SEC reasoned that,
because of the unregulated nature of Bitcoin, the proposed fund
was susceptible to fraud.56 The SEC’s decision regarding the
Bitcoin ETF reflects its distrust towards the crypto asset class
as a whole, especially funds attempting to trade digital
currencies.
The SEC’s assessment pertaining to ETFs can be distinguished
from private investment funds created via the Ethereum smart
contracting on Melonport. Melongport offers technology
operated and regulated funds.57 Most importantly, private
investment funds on Melonport would be actively trading a
more diverse array of crytocurrencies, not just Bitcoin.
Moreover, the audience of a Melonport-type fund is much
more limited and curtails the risk to investors.
By contrast, the Bitcoin ETF application that was denied by the
SEC would have been offered to a much broader investor
group, reinforcing the fears described by the SEC.58 In the
private investment fund space, the investors are typically more
sophisticated because they are required to be accredited
54Russell Brandom, The SEC Just Handed Bitcoin a Huge Setback, THE
VERGE (Mar. 10, 2017, 4:10 PM),
http://www.theverge.com/2017/3/10/14883350/sec-bitcoin-etf-order-
winklevoss-denied.
55 Id.
56Self-Regulatory Organizations; Bats BZX Exchange, Inc.; Order
Disapproving a Proposed Rule Change, as Modified by Amendments No.
1 and 2, to BZX Rule 14.11(e)(4), Commodity-Based Trust Shares, to List
and Trade Shares Issued by the Winklevoss Bitcoin Trust, Exchange Act
Release No. 34-80206 (Mar. 10, 2017),
https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/batsbzx/2017/34-80206.pdf.
57 MELONPORT, https://melonport.com/, (last visited June 25, 2019).
58 Self-Regulatory Organizations, supra note 57.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
investors.59 Still, the SEC’s denial of Bitcoin ETF raises the
question as to whether cryptocurrencies will be able to rid
themselves of the negative connotations that come with the
space and open themselves up to the general public.
2. State Law
Many states have started to amend their corporate and blue-sky
laws to incorporate blockchain technology.
Most notably, Delaware amended the Delaware General
Corporate Law (DGCL) in 2017 to use “distributed electronic
networks or databases” to create and maintain corporate
records.60 Delaware general corporate law has recognized
“distributed electronic networks or databases” as a valid form
of maintaining corporate records.61 This law forces a
corporation using a distributed ledger to retain business records
“provided that the records so kept can be converted into clearly
legible paper form within a reasonable time, and, with respect
to the stock ledger, that the records so kept (i) can be used to
prepare the list of stockholders specified in §§ 219 and 220 of
this title, (ii) record the information specified in §§ 156, 159,
217(a) and 218 of this title, and (iii) record transfers of stock
as governed by Article 8 of subtitle I of Title 6.62
Arizona passed what they call a “Blockchain Bill” into law,
which provides specific regulations for electronic signatures,
blockchain and smart contracts.
59 17 C.F.R. § 230.501 (a)(6). (To be considered an accredited investor an
individual must be a natural persons whose income exceeds $200,000 in
each of the two most recent years (or $300,000 in joint income with a
person’s spouse) and they reasonably expect to reach the same income
level in the current year.)
60 DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 8 (2017).
61 DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 8 § 224 (2017).
62 DEL. CODE ANN. tit. 8 (2017).
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
Wyoming and North Dakota both appear to have changed their
trust law to allow custody63 solutions for digital assets.64 For
example, Wyoming has allowed banks to be the custodians of
different digital assets as long as they comply with all federal
regulations concerning custody matters.65
The state of Vermont adopted a more prudent approach. The
state report “Blockchain Technology: Opportunities and
Risk”66 considered that “at present, the costs and challenges
associated with the use of blockchain technology for
Vermont’s public recordkeeping outweigh the identifiable
benefits.”67 The report also emphasized the relevance of
recognizing blockchain technology, that would determine “a
‘first mover’” advantage with the potential to bring economic
activity surrounding the development of blockchain
technology to Vermont”, remarking the uncertainty around
such potential as, “difficult to quantify and challenging to
capture due to the nature of the technology.”68 For the moment,
Vermont has recognized the possibility to use blockchain in the
context of a trial under specific conditions.69
Several pending legislative proposals may increase the
recognition of blockchain technology under existing law.70 In
63 Under the Wyoming law, custodial service refers to the “safekeeping and
management if customers currency and digital assets through the exercise
of fiduciary and trust powers under this section as a custodian and includes
fund administration and execution of customers instructions. WYO. STAT.
ANN. § 34-29-104 (West).
64 Id.; N.D. CENT. ANN. § 47-36-01 (2017).
65 Title 34, section 29-104 of the Wyoming Code.
66 JAMES CONDOS, WILLIAM H. SORRELL, & SUSAN L.
DONEGAN, BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY: OPPORTUNITIES AND
RISK (2016), http://legislature.vermont.gov/assets/Legislative-
Reports/blockchain-technologyreport-final.pdf
67 Id.
68 Id.
69 See VT. STAT. ANN. tit. 12, § 1913. The Statute defines “blockchain
technology” as “a mathematically secured, chronological, and
decentralized consensus ledger or database, whether maintained via
internet interaction, peer-to-peer network, or otherwise”.
70 In 2018 alone, 18 US states introduced legislation to adopt blockchain
technology in some way. Heather Morton, Blockchain State Legislation,
NCSL (Mar. 28, 2019), http://www.ncsl.org/research/financial-services-
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
early 2017, legislators throughout the United States introduced
legislation to explore virtual currency and blockchain
technology. While some states evaluate opportunities for the
technology to boost the local economy, other states are
implementing specific use cases.71
For example, some states such as Arizona have attempted
unsuccessfully to pass a bill allowing for the payment of taxes
in bitcoin.72 Others states such as Illinois have started initiatives
to “collaborate to explore innovation presented by blockchain
and distributive ledger technology”.73 By states testing the
and-commerce/the-fundamentals-of-risk-management-and-insurance-
viewed-through-the-lens-of-emerging-technology-
webinar.aspx#2018Legis.
71 H.R. 120, 100th Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Il. 2017). Creates a
Legislative Blockchain and Distributed Ledger Task Force to “study how
and if [s]tate, county, and municipal governments can benefit from a
transition to a blockchain.
H.B. 436, 2019 Leg., REg. Sess. (N.H. 2019). Amends New Hampshire’s
Licensing of Money Transmitters statute to specifically address virtual
currency issues. The bill defines virtual currency as “a digital
representation of value that can be digitally traded and functions as a
medium of exchange, a unit of account, or a store of value but does not
have legal tender status as recognized by the United States government.”
H.B. 1481, 2017, Prior Sess. (Haw. 2017). “Establish[es] a working group
consisting of representation from the public and private sectors to examine,
educate, and promote best practices for enabling blockchain technology to
benefit local industries, residents, and the State of Hawaii.”
S.B. 59, 2017 Gen. Assemb., Reg. Sess. (Vt. 2017). S.B. 59 focuses on the
need “to amend and establish laws pertaining to consumer litigation
funding companies; licensed lenders; money servicers; debt adjusters; and
loan servicers.” To accomplish that, the bill adds a definition of virtual
currency to the state’s money services statute (8 V.S.A. § 2500 et seq.):
“stored value that (A) can be a medium of exchange, a unit of account, or
a store of value; (B) has an equivalent value in money or acts as a substitute
for money; (C) may be centralized or decentralized; and (D) can be
exchanged for money or other convertible virtual currency.”
S.B. 5264, 2017 Leg., Reg. Sess. (Wash. 2017). S.B. 5264 seeks to amend
Washington’s Uniform Controlled Substances Act to restrict the use of
virtual currency for the purposes of marijuana sale and distribution. The
bill “prohibits a marijuana producer, processor, or retail outlet from paying
with or accepting virtual currency for the purchase or sale of marijuana or
marijuana products.” H.B. 2216, 53rd Leg. 1st Reg. Sess. (Ariz. 2017).
72 H.B. 1091, 53rd Leg. 2nd Reg. Sess. (Ariz. 2018).
73 Blockchain in Illinois, ILL. DEPT. INNOVATION & TECH., available at
https://www2.illinois.gov/sites/doit/pages/BlockChainInitiative.aspx
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
technology to see what works and what doesn’t, more use cases
are being created. Ideally, states will be able to learn from each
other and adopt working models that help streamline their
processes.
3. SROs
A number of national and other regulatory bodies have initiated
a review of technology-based practices relating directly or
indirectly to the securities and commodities trading industry.
Those include: 1. FINRA,74 2. NASDAQ / NYSE and other
exchanges (proxy PoC project in Estonia, LINQ, etc.),75 3.
CFTC / NFA / CME / exchanges-SROs (e.g., LabCFTC
initiative),76 and 4. GAO (report on Financial Technology
(April 2017)).77
The perspectives introduced by various SROs are closely
aligned with those of the SEC. Most SRO perspectives
acknowledge the clear purpose of the technology but raise
security concerns. These security issues exist for a multitude
of reasons, ranging from asymmetries of knowledge to fear of
not following the SECs lead.
SROs have been strategically positioned where they have some
regulatory authority, but are still beholden to the SEC. SROs
are also in a unique position to help educate the SEC to
becoming more crypto friendly. For example, Nasdaq could
provide use cases on how they have successfully helped
implement the technology in their trading systems while still
74 FINANCIAL INDUSTRY REGULATORY AUTHORITY, Distributed Ledger
Technology: Implications of Blockchaing for the Securities Industry,
http://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/FINRA_Blockchain_Report.pdf
(2017).
75 NASDAQ, Nasdaq Blockchain Strategy: Moving Beyond the POC,
available at
https://business.nasdaq.com/media/Blockchain%20Mutual%20Fund%20
Strategy%20SEB%20and%20Nasdaq%202018_tcm5044-61791.pdf
(2018).
76 U.S. COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION, LabCFTC
Overview, available at
https://www.cftc.gov/LabCFTC/Overview/index.htm.
77 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFF., GAO-17-361 FINANCIAL
TECHNOLOGY: INFORMATION ON SUBSECTORS AND REGULATORY
OVERSIGHT (2017).
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
maintaining investor protection. By slowly showing
successful use cases, the SEC will be more comfortable taking
a stance on how these instruments should be treated.
VI. Conclusion and Outlook
Our analysis in this paper suggests that Blockchain technology
has the potential to support cheaper and more reliable public
offerings that could make the U.S. capital markets more
accessible to companies, and possibly lead to more public
offerings and listings. However, the far more important
objective should be the development of a legal and regulatory
regime to support widespread trading of securities offered
through a blockchain-based process – one that would satisfy
broad public demand for the issuer’s securities.
Blockchain presents unique and potentially significant profit
opportunities for multiple parties, including developers and the
consortia or companies which operate platforms on which
blockchain could operate.
Blockchain has the potential to support cheaper and more
reliable public offerings, as reference further above. In this
sense, blockchain could potentially make the U.S. capital
markets – the largest public pool of capital in the world -- more
accessible to companies, and possibly lead to more public
offerings and listings.
Regulators and quasi-regulatory bodies have begun to assess
the impact of blockchain on the securities offering process,
including with respect to the development of new or revised
laws and regulations, and the roles of the parties involved in
traditional offerings.
The utilization of blockchain as a more efficient and reliable
public offering medium will almost certainly require
modifying many of the (i) regulations applicable to the offering
process, (ii) processes by which securities are offered to the
public and settled and administered in the after-market, and
(iii) roles and responsibilities among market-participants (e.g.,
underwriters, brokers (in distribution), DTC, and Cede & Co.)
that have developed over decades to effect public offerings.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
Ultimately, using blockchain technology to support trading by
retail investors of “digital securities” on a widespread basis
(including, for example, to allow margining of “digital
securities”) will be the linchpin of survivability and evolution
of blockchain-based securities offerings. Without retail
investor access, the technology may remain marginalized in the
offering process.
Several factors suggest that blockchain-based securities
offerings may be here to stay: 1. Trading of privately-issued
“digital securities” (e.g., through LINQ) has been
accomplished and proven, and 2. The potentially significant
reduction in administrative and operational / processing costs
associated with issuing and trading securities (e.g., from STP)
has been analyzed extensively.
Yet, other factors highlight the need for enhanced scrutiny of
blockchain-based securities offerings. Other than in relation to
“unicorns,” there is not likely to be broad-based (retail) interest
in privately-placed “digital securities,” or securities that trade
on a single, non-scalable ATS. Hence, capital-raising
opportunities for private companies likely would not be
materially increased despite the validation of blockchain
technology as a means of cost-effectively supporting securities
offerings.
Consequently, the far more important objective should be the
development of a legal and regulatory regime to support
widespread trading of securities offered through a blockchain-
based process – one that would satisfy broad public demand
for the issuer’s securities. With legal support and certainty,
broad-based trading of “digital securities” would provide
liquidity to market-participants and investors, attracting more
investors and capital.
Governmental endorsement and guidance on crypto
investments in the United States is essential for future
securities offerings involving crypto currencies and blockchain
technology, in the existing regulatory infrastructure and
beyond. As the market for crypto investments grows, the
regulatory gap between the existing regulatory infrastructure
and crypto securities investment will inevitably increase
further.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED SECURITIES OFFERINGS
Development of blockchain-based processes, in any case, will
take several years if not decades, and so the most likely
circumstance is that legacy and blockchain-based securities
issuance, trading, settlement, and related systems and
processes will have to co-exist side-by-side for the foreseeable
future.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411110

