Code Review DAO
Wulf Kaal, Ph.D.1
Abstract
The open-source code review process is upgraded and scaled
through the use of decentralized community governance. The code
review decentralized autonomous organization (CRDAO)
distinguishes itself from legacy system code review competitors
through industry-leading code review price discovery, increased
speed, community audit, competitive pricing, WEB3 transparency,
and accountability. The key distinguishing feature of the CRDAO
code review process is its unparalleled ability to apply
community code review audits.
Key Words: Code Audit, Quality Controls, Code Assurances,
Decentralized Autonomous Organization, Token Models,
Cryptocurrencies, Feedback Effects, Emerging Technology, Tokens,
Blockchain, Distributed Ledger Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
1 Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law. The Author is
grateful to many members of the open source community who provided valuable
feedback.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Table of Contents
Background 3
Growth Potential of the Smart Contract Industry 5
Smart Contract Vulnerabilities Undermine Industry Growth 6
Solutions for Smart Contract Vulnerability 8
Community Audits 9
AI-Driven Solutions 11
Market for Code Reviews 13
Single Points of Failure 14
Timing 15
Current Players in the Field 15
Overpricing 15
No Controls 16
Code Review DAO 16
Feedback Loops 17
Price Discovery 18
Standards 19
Speed 19
Code Testing 19
Community Audit 20
CRDAO Code Review Process 21
Scaling the Code Review DAO 21
Freelance Micro Task Market Growth 22
Shortcomings in Legacy Micro Task Market 24
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Lack of Scaling Solutions in Centralized Micro Task Market 25
Overpricing 25
Duplication of Work 25
No Access for Workers 26
CRDAO Micro Task Work 26
Benefits of Reputation in Micro Tasks 28
Removing Cost of Duplication 28
Transaction Cost Minimization of Micro Task Work 30
Optimizing Payment Systems in Micro Task Work 31
Anonymity Facilitates Equity 31
Conclusion 32
Background
Code review is a process that is intended to ensure software
quality. Usually, it consists of developers, other than the
author of a given piece of code, manually checking code or
changing the code before they are merged into the main code
repository.2 Ideally, the process of code review finds defects or
improvement opportunities without the software execution and
before the product delivery, thereby reducing the costs of
future fixes.3
2 Nicole Davila & Ingrid Nunes, A Systemic Literature Review and Taxonomy of
Modern Code Review, 177 J. SYS. & SOFTWARE 1110951 (2021).
3 Id. at 1.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Modern code review (MCR) can be traced back to software
“inspections.”4 Inspections consisted of formal meetings where
participants would prepare ahead of time. Unlike inspections,
many modern code review processes are asynchronous and often
support geographically distributed reviewers.5 Adopting agile
methods and distributed software development has resulted in
less formal code reviews where the inefficiencies of inspections
are replaced with a flexible, tool-based, and frequent process
known as modern code review.6
Code reviews are recognized as a vital practice to assure
software quality. Many open-source projects such as Android, QT,
and Eclipse, include code review as part of their software
development process.7 Moreover, many large technology companies
like Microsoft, Oracle, and Samsung, all adopt code reviews for
their software development.8 Code reviews provide many benefits,
for example: they attempt to find bugs in the code, help improve
the quality of the code on productions, find better ways to
implement the change, spread knowledge about the project, and
create awareness of the changes in the code base.9
4 Jacek Czerwonka, Michaela Greiler & Jack Tilford, Code Reviews Do Not Find
Bugs: How the Current Code Review Best Practice Slows Us Down, 37th IEEE
International Conference on Software Engineering 1, 27-28 (2015).
5 Id. at 1.
6 Id. at 2.
7Felipe Ebert, Fernando Castor, Nicole Novielli & Alexander Serebrenik, An
Exploratory Study on Confusion inCode Reviews, 26 EMPIRICAL SOFTWARE ENG’G 12
(2021).
8 Id. at 2.
9 Id. at 2.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Despite the benefits and widespread adoption within the
technology industry, code reviews can incur great cost and slow
down the overall code development process.10 Consequently, modern
code review processes are expensive. Developers spend a
significant amount of time reviewing the changes of others – an
average of 6 hours per week.11 Not only is this a significant
amount of time, but it also requires an opportunity cost on
project development as developers are forced to switch away from
their current work. Therefore, it is important to pinpoint the
issues that make modern code review a timely and expensive
process in an effort to understand solutions to these issues.
It is a common conception that code reviews increase the
functionality and quality of code. Code reviews also clarify the
intended functionality of the code which minimizes the risk that
malfunctioning or suboptimal code gets released and causes
damages.
Growth Potential of the Smart Contract Industry
The smart contract industry has enormous growth potential.
Different measures help asses that growth including the CAGR
(compounded annual growth rate) used as well as the current
valuation of the smart contract industry. Estimates of the smart
10 Id.
11 Czerwonka, supra note 4.
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

contract industry’s future value by 2032 range from 1 to 2.5
billion dollars.12
Smart Contract Vulnerabilities Undermine Industry Growth
The growth of the smart contract industry across industry
vectors is affected by the attack vectors pertaining to smart
contracts. Smart contract bugs can result in financial loss,
12 Varying group estimates are listed below from low to high.Group Estimates
for the Smart Contract Industry’s Value by 2032:
1. SNS Insider: $1 billion, at a CAGR of 24.2%
1.1.Smart Contracts Market Size, SNS Insider, https://www.snsinsider.com/
reports/smart-contracts-market-1542 (last visited Jan. 4, 2024).
2. Verified Market Research: $1.2 billion, at a CAGR of 26.4%
2.1.Smart Contracts Market Size and Forecast, Verified Market Research,
https://www.verifiedmarketresearch.com/product/smart-contracts-market/
(last visited Jan. 4, 2024).
3. Valuates Reports: $1.4 billion, at a CAGR of 24.2%
3.1. Global Smart Contracts Market Research Report, Valuates Reports,
https://reports.valuates.com/market-reports/QYRE-Auto-31L1599/global-
smart-contracts (last visited Jan. 4, 2024).
4. Acumen Research & Consulting: $1.417 billion, at a CAGR of 22.8%
4.1.Smart Contracts Market Size: Global Industry, Share, Analysis, Trends
and Forecast 2023 – 2032, ACUMEN RESEARCH & CONSULTING, https://
www.acumenresearchandconsulting.com/smart-contracts-market (last
visited Jan. 4, 2024).
5. Future Market Insights: $1.5 billion, at a CAGR of 23.5%
5.1.Smart Contracts Market Outlook (2022 to 2032), Future Market Insights,
https://www.futuremarketinsights.com/reports/smart-contracts-market
(last visited Jan. 4, 2024).
6. Allied Market Research: $2.5 billion, at a CAGR of 29.6%
6.1.Smart Contracts Market Research, 2032, ALLIED MARKET RESEARCH,
https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/smart-contracts-market-A144098
(last visited Jan. 4, 2024).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

reputational loss, increased smart contract costs, legal issues,
and, in extreme cases, destruction of the smart contract.13
While no clear data exists to estimate how much smart contract
attack vectors will limit the growth of the smart contract
industry, the smart contracts industry is still estimated to
grow to several billion dollars in the next decade—despite the
cost of security audits and financial losses from bad actors
exploiting smart contracts bugs. Estimates on financial loss
attributable to security breaches and attach vectors of smart
contracts range from hundreds of millions to billions of
dollars. For example, between 2016 and 2018, seven cybersecurity
incidents occurred in Ethereum smart contracts resulting in
13 See David Balaban, Navigating The Security Challenges Of Smart Contracts,
FORBES (Feb. 11, 2023, 6:33 AM), https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidbalaban/
2023/02/11/navigating-the-security-challenges-of-smart-contracts/?
sh=14006afd4992; Majd Soud, Grischa Liebel & Mohammad Hamdaqa, PrAIoritize:
Learning to Prioritize Smart Contract Bugs and Vulnerabilities (Working
Paper), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.11082.pdf; Sherman Lee, Blockchain Smart
Contracts: More Trouble Than They Are Worth? FORBES (Jul 10, 2018,11:38 PM),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/shermanlee/2018/07/10/blockchain-smart-
contracts-more-trouble-than-they-are-worth/?sh=74b5654523a6. Haozhe Zhou,
Amin Milani Fard & Adetokunbo Makanju, The State of Ethereum Smart Contracts
Security, 2 J. CYBERSECURITY & PRIV. 358 (2022); Hanting Chu et al., A Survey on
Smart Contract Vulnerabilities: Data Sources, Detection, and Repair, 196 INFO.
& SOFTWARE TECH. 1 (2023), https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0950584923000757; MacKenzie Sigalos, Bug Puts $162 Million up for Grabs,
Says Founder of DeFi Platform Compound, CNBC.com (Oct. 3, 2021, 2:41 PM),
https://www.cnbc.com/2021/10/03/162-million-up-for-grabs-after-bug-in-defi-
protocol-compound-.html; Tamer Abdelaziz & Aquinas Hobor, Smart Learning to
Find Dumb Contracts, Proceedings of the 32nd USENIX Security Symposium 1775
(2023), https://www.usenix.org/system/files/usenixsecurity23-abdelaziz.pdf,
Fabio Gritti et al., Confusum Contractum: Confused Deputy Vulnerabilities in
Ethereum Smart Contracts, Proceedings of the 32nd USENIX Security Symposium
1793 (2023) https://www.usenix.org/system/files/usenixsecurity23-gritti.pdf.
In one study, researchers found that 127 high-impact attacks were responsible
for financial losses totaling $2.3 billion. Stefanos Chaliasos et al., Smart
Contract and DeFi Security: Insights from Tool Evaluations and Practitioner
Surveys (Working Paper), https://www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~livshits/papers/pdf/
icse24.pdf.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

financial losses of over $289 million.14 In 2021 alone total
financial loss from smart contract bugs was estimated at $680
million.15 Some estimates put the current global financial loss
due to smart contract vulnerabilities over 6 billion dollars.16
Solutions for Smart Contract Vulnerability
A diverse set of proposed solutions has emerged to address smart
contract vulnerabilities issues and reduce the overall number of
attacks. One potential solution is the use of a smart contract
compiler.17 For example, one such compiler is HCC, which
automatically inserts security hardening checks at the source-
code level.18 HCC develops a code property graph (CPG) to model
control-flows and data-flows of a given smart contract. Due to
the CPG notation, HCC can be applied to various smart contract
platforms and programming languages. HCC developers have
demonstrated it efficiently mitigates reentrancy and integer
bugs.19 They also show how to integrate HCC within other
blockchain platforms such as Hyperledger Fabric. Their
14 Ayman Alkhalifah et al., A Mechanism to Detect and Prevent Ethereum
Blockchain Smart Contract Reentrancy Attacks, 3 FRONTIERS IN COMPUT. SCI. 1
(2021), https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcomp.2021.598780/full.
15 Thomas Claburn, Smart Contract Developers Not Really Focused on Security:
Who Knew?, THE REGISTER (Apr. 26, 2022), https://www.theregister.com/
2022/04/26/smart_contract_losses/.
16 Stefanos Chaliasos et al., Smart Contract and DeFi Security: Insights from
Tool Evaluations and Practitioner Surveys (Working Paper), https://
www.doc.ic.ac.uk/~livshits/papers/pdf/icse24.pdf.
17 Jens-Rene Giesen et al., Practical Mitigation of Smart Contract Bugs
(Working Paper), https://arxiv.org/pdf/2203.00364.pdf.
18 Id.
19 Id.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

evaluation on 10k real-world contracts demonstrates that HCC is
highly practical.20
Altering the methodology of bug classification and vulnerability
analysis provides another promising approach. In one study,
researchers propose two new vulnerability classes: distributed
system protocol (DSP) and distributed system resource management
(DRM).21
Community Audits
Community audits, or “bug bounties,” have emerged as a popular
tool to combat smart contract vulnerabilities. The premise is
simple: pay hackers to demonstrate how existing code is
exploitable. Alas, hackers often sell the bug or exploit them
when they discover them.22 Bug bounty programs also suffer from
additional drawbacks: (1) they use a trusted intermediary that
charges hefty commission fees and may have a conflict of
interest with the software vendor, and (2) they may provide
challenges for security researchers by compensating less than
20 Id.
21 Wesley Dingman et al., Defects and Vulnerabilities in Smart Contracts, a
Classification Using the NIST Bugs Framework, 73 Int’l J. Networked &
Distributed Computing 121 (2019), https://www.atlantis-press.com/journals/
ijndc/125913574/view?ref=metastate.
22 Ed Marcavage, Jake Mason & Chen Zhong, Predicting the Effectiveness of
Blockchain Bug Bounty Programs,36 FLAIRS (2023), https://journals.flvc.org/
FLAIRS/article/view/133377/137631.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

guaranteed and may provide no means to appeal against it.23 Web 3
technologies may help eliminate all of these problems.24
One potential solution to these problems is the Hydra
Framework.25 Hydra incentivizes bug disclosure through an exploit
gap, a program transformation that enables runtime detection,
and rewarding, of critical bugs.26 The framework transforms
programs via N-of-N-version programming, a variant of classical
N-version programming that runs multiple independent program
instances. Id. Testing with Hydra contracts demonstrated the
power of bounties and established the first framework for
rigorous economic evaluation of smart contract security. Id.
Another potential solution exists in Bounty Chain, a
decentralized application using Ethereum-based Smart Contracts
and the Interplanetary File System (IPFS), a distributed file
storage system.27 Blockchain and smart contracts provide a safe,
secure and transparent platform for a bug bounty program.
Testers can submit bug reports and organizations can accept or
reject the defect via the smart contracts. Transactions on the
23 Lital Badash et al., Blockchain-based Bug Bounty Framework, Proceedings of
the 26th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied Computing 239 (2021), https://
dl.acm.org/doi/pdf/10.1145/3412841.3441906.
24 Id.
25 Lorenz Breidenbach, Philip Daian, Florian Tramer & Ari Juels, Enter the
Hydra: Towards Principled Bug Bounties and Exploit-Resistant Smart Contracts,
Proceedings of the 27th USENIX Security Symposium 1335 (2018), https://
www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/usenixsecurity18/sec18-
breidenbach.pdf.
26 Id.
27 Alex Hoffman et al., Bountychain: Toward Decentralizing a Bug Bounty
Program with Blockchain and IPFS, 9 INT’L J. NETWORKED & DISTRIBUTED COMPUTING 86
(2021), https://digitalscholarship.unlv.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
article=1255&context=compsci_fac_articles.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

blockchain serve as a persistent and transparent record of
software bugs. IPFS serves as a long-term storage system for bug
details. Thus, Bounty Chain ensures organization accountability
and allows testers to gain irrefutable recognition.
A last solution would be integrating bug bounty programs with
improved threat modeling techniques through Metric-Based
Feedback Methodology. When analyzing and categorizing
vulnerability data, Metric-Based Feedback Methodologyfound
enables identifying root causes and refines threat models to
prioritize security efforts more effectively.28
AI-Driven Solutions
The integration of blockchain technology and AI has immense
promise.29 AI technology appears best suited to eliminating bugs
through enhanced bug tracking and bug audits. A recent review of
over 100 research papers revealed that integrating the two
technologies results increases the security, efficiency, and
productivity of the applications.30
28 Serhan W. Bahar, Advanced Security Threat Modelling for Blockchain-Based
FinTech Applications (Working Paper), https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/
2304/2304.06725.pdf.
29 Rashi Saxena, E. Gayathri & Lalitha Surya Kumari, Semantic Analysis of
Blockchain Intelligence with Proposed Agenda for Future Issues, 14 Int’l J.
Sys. Assurance Eng’g & Mgmt. 34 (2023), https://link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s13198-023-01862-y.
30 Id.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Most bug tracking is done manually by software engineers, which
impairs bug triaging.31 To address this problem, researchers
propose PrAIoritize; an automated approach for predicting smart
contract bug priorities that assist software engineers in
prioritizing highly urgent bug reports.32
Enhanced smart contract auditing can be accomplished through
deep learning techniques. In a recent study, researchers trained
three deep models for detecting vulnerabilities in smart
contract: Optimized-CodeBERT, Optimized-LSTM, and Optimized-
CNN.33 Experimental results show that Optimized-CodeBERT model
surpasses other methods, achieving an f1-score of 93.53%.34 To
precisely extract vulnerability features, they acquired segments
of vulnerable code functions to retain critical vulnerability
features. Using the CodeBERT pre-training model for data
preprocessing, the authors could capture the syntax and
semantics of the code more accurately. The authors evaluated its
performance using the SolidiFI-benchmark dataset, which consists
of 9369 vulnerable contracts injected with vulnerabilities from
seven different types.
In another study, researchers trained artificial neural networks
(ANN), long-short term memory (LSTM), and gated recurrent unit
models (GRU) and compared their accuracy, precision, recall, and
31 Majd Soud, Grischa Liebel & Mohammad Hamdaqa, PrAIoritize: Learning to
Prioritize Smart Contract Bugs and Vulnerabilities (Working Paper), https://
arxiv.org/pdf/2308.11082.pdf.
32 Xueyan Tang, Yuying Du, Alan Lai, Ze Zhang & Lingzhi Shi, Deep
Learning-based Solution for Smart Contract Vulnerabilities Detection, 13 Sci.
Rep. 1 (2023), https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-023-47219-0.
33 Id.
34 Id.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve values.35 The
network was trained on an open Google BigQuery dataset with 7000
samples. Their results demonstrated that the LSTM model
outperforms ANN and GRU.36 Lastly, AI technology has the
potential to generally improve smart contract security.37
Market for Code Reviews
The market for code reviews in 2024 is dominated by centralized
market participants. The existing code review industry is
subject to significant cost, inefficiencies, barriers to entry,
and lack of assurances for code review job posters, among other
lack of client services for code reviews. In 2024, the code
review industry is dominated by several key players who can
charge exorbitant and monopoly-like prices. Despite these high
prices, the code review process is subject to significant flaws.
First and foremost, the selection process for the reviewer is an
ongoing challenge for the existing code review process in legacy
code review firms. The more hierarchical the code review
process is, the lower is the quality of the reviewed code. It
makes intuitive sense that the more developers review a given
code set, the higher the code quality may turn out to be.
However, in the legacy review process, the first reviewer within
35 Rajesh Gupta et al., Deep Learning-based Malicious Smart Contract Detection
Scheme for Internet of Things Environment, 97 COMPUT. & ELEC. ENG’G 1 (2022),
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S004579062100519X.
36 Id.
37 Moez Krichen, Strengthening the Security of Smart Contracts through the
Power of Artificial Intelligence, 12 COMP. 107 (2023), https://www.mdpi.com/
2073-431X/12/5/107.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

the hierarchical structure of the code review process often gets
the highest priority and is often merely followed with minor
upgrades by follow-on reviewers. The collective of reviewers is
also not incentivized to find flaws in the code to optimize code
as a work product of the collective. Rather, it is often seen as
the work product of the initial reviewer with minor input from
follow-up reviewers. Moreover, the more people review the code
with comments that ask for clarification, the more likely it
becomes that the code becomes simpler and clearer, which in turn
typically increases code quality. However, that is not possible
in hierarchical review processes. The hierarchical approach to
code reviews undermines long-term participation with opinions
from the edges of the reviewer spectrum because those reviewers
either have no access or are in no position to help review the
code. In other words, the more hierarchical the code review
process and the more barriers to entry, the lower the quality of
the code.
Single Points of Failure
In the existing legacy code review process, the views of the
reviewer and the intent of the code author are often at odds
with each other without any crowd control. Because the code
reviewer may wish to impose their logic on the code author, the
code author may be required to rewrite code over and over even
though the core functionality of the code is sound and dangerous
issues were controlled for. This can be highly time-consuming
and inefficient. It also calls the overall role of the code
review process into question. Instead, a code review should
focus on the functionality of the code and on keeping mistaken,
badly constructed, and dangerous code out.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

If the single author of a code review has missed something and
the follow-on reviewer focused entirely on the first reviewer's
concerns, the code review has a higher risk of lack of accuracy.
Crowd wisdom is one way to correct possible myopia and single
points of failure through standard legacy code review.
Timing
Depending on the setting of the code review, code reviews in
legacy systems can last weeks and months. This can be
exacerbated by market conditions in the digital asset market.
These significant delays can impact development and may require
complete rewriting of contracts because the underlying protocol
may have upgraded core libraries during the code review.
Current Players in the Field
Even though most code review firms help clients who hope to
decentralize different parts of the industry and capitalize on
efficiencies created by decentralizing legacy systems, the code
review industry is mainly dominated by a few players.
The current market dynamics dominated by the top 5 audit firms
also create high barriers to entry for new players to enter into
the code review market.
Given these downsides in the existing code review market, it is
a bit ironic that one of the strongest forms of exploitation and
centralized economies of scale are being created in a market
that is, from the outset, supposed to help support the
decentralization of disparate industries.
Overpricing
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

As a result of the centralization of the industry, most code
reviews are significantly overpriced. Clients pretty much pay
any price to get the stamp of approval from one of the top 5
audit firms.
No Controls
The centralized power also undermines attempts by other industry
players to create internal or external controls on the quality
of code reviews. As a result, the public has no or very weak
control over the quality of code review services it receives.
job posters cannot afford to look for better-priced code reviews
and are forced into considerable pricing to obtain market
acceptance of their products. In turn, the centralization of
the market undermines any form of downward price pressure.
Because of the power of the limited players over the overall
market and the process of the code review and its outputs, the
quality of code review is often suboptimal.
Moreover, there is little or no recourse for clients in cases in
which the code proved to be flawed even after functionality and
quality review.
Code Review DAO
The CRDAO is tackling many of the issues that afflict the modern
code review market.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

The CRDAO provides a new code review platform, which
facilitates a decentralized community-driven code review process
that utilizes a bidding process on code reviews to drive prices
down. It provides open access for code reviews from anyone who
qualifies – not just members of the few code review firms. At
the same time, it provides full incentivization for community
code reviews through its decentralized governance framework.
Given its universal access and price discovery methodology
(through a public bidding process), the CRDAO creates low
barriers to entry in the code review market. Anyone can join the
CRDAO by submitting high-quality code reviews through the
CRDAO portal.
The CRDAO also uses a community policing and audit methodology
for code reviews. This is enabled by the Code Review DAO38
(CRDAO) governance model. Moreover, the CRDAO governance and
policing functions ensure less duplication of code reviews.
CRDAO maintains strong incentives for community-driven code
review audits.
The CRDAO can function as a first-round code review or multi-
round code review with different code review teams. In summary,
job posters receive low-priced, high-quality code reviews with
community validation of reviews.
Feedback Loops
38 DAOs are short for Decentralized Autonomous Organizations. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Decentralized_autonomous_organization#:~:text=Decentralized%20autonomous%20or
ganizations%20are%20typified,dissemination%20of%20a%20distributed%20database.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

CRDAO provides an early feedback loop on code reviews for the
developer community at a much lower price than the traditional
code review and audit market.
The CRDAO crowd controls filter out idiosyncratic code reviewer
preferences. Code reviews in legacy code review firms are often
highly subjective which leads to rather suboptimal outcomes
without crowd controls. No single developer may agree on a given
set of code and its intended functionality and quality in
achieving the coded objectives. This can be attributed to
different programming languages with different styles and unique
and often idiosyncratic preferences. Instead, the CRDAO
mandates that reviews are subject to crowd review and policing
votes by the CRDAO collective. Accordingly, code reviewers are
less likely to engage in highly idiosyncratic reviews as they
would need to fear slashing and loss of standing in the
community.
Price Discovery
The existing code review market does not provide publicly
transparent pricing of code review services. As such, the
existing market arguably harms the public for the benefit of the
few market players and its clients. In the existing system, the
unilateral pricing is not disclosed because both the client and
code reviewer may not benefit from public scrutiny of the
prices.
This price discovery mechanism serves a key public service
function in that it enables full-price transparency for
consumers based on the visibility of the internal and external
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

bids on job posts. This price transparency is unique and
unprecedented in a market.
Price discovery is a key public services function because,
without public pricing, consumers cannot realistically select
the service provider that provides the highest value to the job
poster. The lack of transparency enables insider deals to the
detriment of the clients, who are forced into the price a group
of firms dictates.
Standards
The CRDAO also fills the void left in legacy reviews without
common standards. The CRDAO creates a compendium of reviews and
through it a common standard for code reviews that are otherwise
lacking in legacy code review environments. Should a collective
review code under a common set of standards, the standards help
guide both the reviewers and the collective to come to a common
form of expectations on the applied functionality and quality
outcomes for the code.
Speed
The feedback provided by the CRDAO for the developer community
enables risk-taking for dev teams who wish to move quickly
through their governance and upgrade process, which in turn
enables accelerated growth and scaling of experimentation.
Code Testing
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

The code reviews provided by the CRDAO provide a first
instantiation of flat hierarchy-driven decentralized peer-
reviewed code reviews. All testing performed by the CRDAO
follows the core standards established for the CRDAO community.
All testing and standards are subject to constant review and
experimentation and are continually, dynamically, and
evolutionarily updated in a constant feedback loop between all
constituents, that is between the CRDAO member, the job
posters, and public bidders and applicants for CRDAO VA status.
Community Audit
The audit starts with the community discussion of the code
review, followed by an informal vote on the code. The community
that bids for the posted jobs and then reviews the submitted job
and votes on it after the forum discussion is constituted by the
evolving community membership of the Code Review Platform. The
informal vote shows all CRDAO members the collective wisdom as
applied to the work product examined in the code review. Once
the entire community knows how each member feels about the code
review examined, the CRDAO now votes in a formal vote in which
the reputation tokens staked are at risk. This sequence of votes
provides job posters with significant assurances that the code
examined and the CRDAO report on the code adheres to the highest
standards of quality available.
Moreover, the community of code reviewers is governed by a
unique set of governance standards. Developers on the CRDAO
Network can participate directly in the evolution of the CRDAO
Network through participation in the CRDAO. The CRDAO follows a
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

decentralized framework of governance that was developed by
Craig Calcaterra and Wulf Kaal.39
CRDAO Code Review Process
The code review process of the CRDAO revolves around CRDAO
community engagement which minimizes issues of lack of crowd
controls, lowers time requirements for code reviews, lowers
prices of code reviews, increases developer participation, and
increases overall feedback.
Scaling the Code Review DAO
Scaling the CRDAO operations is a key objective for CRA. The
CRDAO uses several key reputation related metrics, as
illustrated below, to scale its operations over time.
39 Craig Calcaterra Wulf Kaal & Vlad Andrei, Blockchain Infrastructure for
Measuring Domain Specific Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and
Anonymous Systems (U of St. Thomas (Minnesota) Legal Studies Research Paper
No. 18-11, 2018), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

To enable the public to participate in and contribute to the
Code Review Platform, the CRDAO is using a gamified reputation
system. Any user can access and contribute to the CRDAO and earn
reputation tokens and NFTs on the platform. While the code
reviews themselves are relegated to the expert members of the
Code Review Platform, the public can support the ultimate code
reviews via gamified engagements.
Mechanical Turk (as defined below) functionality is a core
application of the CRDAO Protocol and the CRDAO ecosystem. Other
use cases and applications will evolve on the CRDAO over time.
The CRDAO architecture will evolve in any setting that supports
the ethical advancement of the crypto evolution.
Freelance Micro Task Market Growth
In the current freelancer market, leading centralized platforms
Fiverr, Taskrabbit, Upwork, Crowdflower and Mechanical Turk have
their workforces distributed throughout the world. Micro Tasks
freelance work is becoming increasingly important in the
freelance market.
Micro tasks are defined as small tasks that require human
judgment, can be completed by humans independently over the
internet, and are part of a larger unified project. Because of
the necessity of human judgment that cannot currently be
replaced by machines/computers, micro tasks enable organizations
to build products or create outcomes that cannot be synthesized
by machines/computers alone. For example, the Chinese government
uses 2 million micro task workers to aid in censoring the
internet. Internet companies, such as Google, Facebook, Twitter,
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Ebay, and Linkedin optimize their production ready solutions and
enhance their AI model training with micro task workers. Large
scale distributions of machine learning researchers, among
others, gather structured labeled data for artificial
intelligence (AI) training purposes through the use of micro
task workers.
Billions of micro tasks are completed each year and the demand
for micro task workers is increasing consistently. In an attempt
to capitalize on the growing demand for micro task work, Amazon
created Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk) in 2005. MTurk is an
online marketplace that allows requesters to pay workers for
performing micro tasks online, thus crowdsourcing data
collection. The World Bank concluded in a 2015 report, that the
largest crowdsourced data collection platforms Amazon Mechanical
Turk and CrowdFlower, a venture backed company that raised over
$58 million and is focused on enriching data used for AI, would
quadruple their revenue from 2013 to 2016.
The increasing demand for micro task workers that came initially
from data scientists and other academics is further increased by
the growth of artificial intelligence (AI) and the increasing
scope and scale of AI applications in a broad range of
industries. Fortune 500 tech companies including Amazon, Apple,
Google Alphabet, Twitter, and Facebook use AI and machine
learning to improve their services and cut costs, thus
increasing profitability exponentially. According to some
estimates, Fortune 500 tech companies spent between $20 and $30
billion on the development and enhancement of their AI systems
in 2016. More recent data for 2017 suggests that this trend is
continuing and increasing. AI is already playing a significant
role in consumer expectations and tech companies have the best
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

possible set of incentives to keep investing in AI to fulfill
such expectations and develop new products at marginal cost.
Shortcomings in Legacy Micro Task Market
The evolution, improvements, and growth of AI is correlated with
the evolution, improvements, and growth in micro task work. AI
uses supervised and unsupervised as well as reinforcement
machine learning. Because unsupervised and reinforcement
learning are much more complex than supervised learning,
supervised learning is to date more common and more relied upon
for AI development. While this may change as unsupervised and
reinforcement learning evolve, currently, supervised learning
depends on labeled data that is produced via micro task work.
The mapping function of the supervised AI learning process
necessitates the analysis of labeled input variables x and
corresponding output variables y. In the supervised learning
training phase, the AI neural network examines the training
dataset of labeled x input data to learn to classify the input
data idealistically. The higher the quality and quantity of such
labeled datasets the better the AI neural network’s learning
algorithm during the supervised training process. Accordingly,
the evolution, improvements, and growth of AI is correlated with
the evolution, improvements, and growth in micro tasks work. But
alas, microtasks platform systems are subject to significant
limitations that inhibit the evolution of AI.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Lack of Scaling Solutions in Centralized Micro Task Market
Overpricing
The existing centralized marketplaces for micro task work cannot
adequately fulfill the increasing demand for high quality micro
task work for AI labeled training datasets. First and foremost,
the cost structure for micro task work in centralized systems
that necessitate intermediation results in significant
overpricing without benefiting the micro task workers directly.
The cost structure suboptimality can be traced back to several
factors. All too human shortcomings of micro task works, such as
limited attention span, irrationality, and inaccuracies result
in verification requirements for micro task work. However,
manual verification of micro task work is subject to the same
human limitations.
Duplication of Work
In an attempt to ensure quality of results and minimize the
impact of the human limitations of their workers, requesters in
centralized micro task structures set up teams of up to 15
workers to perform the same task in an effort to form a
consensus. The multiplication of work inherent in this process
significantly increases the cost of micro task work. Requiring
requesters to pay proportionally (e.g. up to 15 times) for work
per project results in waste. The necessity of multiplication of
work also subjects micro task workers to lower rates and lack of
payment increases. Moreover, because unmanaged centralized micro
task platforms do not supply consumer interfaces needed to
accomplish specific tasks, requesters of micro task work are
forced to either build their own tools or pay large fees to
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

startups that hope to capture the enterprise market. Both
options are necessary in current centralized systems but also
result in underutilization of resources.
No Access for Workers
Most importantly, the circa 38% of the labor pool that is
unbanked but skilled does not currently have access to the
centralized micro task marketplaces. Without a bank account,
workers cannot contribute and profit from the existing
centralized micro task marketplace. Furthermore, even for those
in the labor pool who do have bank accounts, micro-task work is
often associated with practical problems such as high fees of
intermediary financial institutions, lost or otherwise affected
payments, lost checks, among other issues. Finally, micro
workers in centralized systems are faced with invasive, privacy
challenging, time consuming, and unclear signup and approval
processes that create market entry barriers for micro task
workers.
CRDAO Micro Task Work
The CRDAO is tapping into this rising micro task market by
providing users with gamified access to code reviews. Key
examples that set precedent for the gamification include Axie
Infinity and other scaling Ethereum games that attained
worldwide audiences.
Through the gamification, the CRDAO is bringing 1000s of
additional users to the platform. While the CRDAO has been in
operation for over 3 years with over 300 jobs performed by an
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

expert code reviewer member group of the Code Review Platform,
the platform through the proprietary CRDAO token token raise,
is opening up the engagement to the public.
Public users can purchase proprietary CRDAO token tokens and
use their proprietary CRDAO token to perform micro tasks on the
Code Review Platform. Through the non-custodial staking of their
proprietary CRDAO token , the public users become part of a
larger community and gain reputation tokens. The more they
engage with the Code Review Platform, the more their reputation
will grow and the more proprietary CRDAO token tokens they can
earn.
For example, micro tasks that are required for code reviews can
include the creation of learning datasets that can be used by AI
optimization tools in the Code Review Platform. With that
definition of micro tasks, the public may earn reputation tokens
simply by clicking on pictures provided by the Code Review
Platform.
The public users who become part of the public proprietary CRDAO
token community that earns reputation tokens will receive a
proprietary CRDAO token allocation that is associated with the
end product of the code review the public community participated
in through their micro tasks. Through this mechanism, the public
earns proprietary CRDAO token proportional to their engagement
with the proprietary CRDAO token token and the Code Review
Platform. The higher each public community members’ reputation
score, the higher their pro rata participation in the code
review fees that are paid to the Code Review Platform.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

The participation of the public proprietary CRDAO token
community goes further with their ability to earn proprietary
CRDAO token NFT badges. The CRDAO offers stages of public
engagement measured for each user in their respective reputation
tokens. Once the public user reaches a threshold of reputation
score X, the respective user qualifies for the automatic
acquisition of proprietary CRDAO token community NFTs. Such
NFTs are for sale on OpenSea and are subject to market force
pricing.
Benefits of Reputation in Micro Tasks
Using reputation systems, the CRDAO optimizes the existing Micro
Task Market by: 1. Removing the cost of duplication of micro
task work and thus scaling micro task work, 2. Minimizing
transaction costs, 2. Optimizing payment systems in micro task
work, and 3. Facilitating anonymity for enhanced worker
participation and equity.
Removing Cost of Duplication
Centralized micro task work requires duplication to ensure
quality. All too human shortcomings of micro task works, such as
limited attention span, irrationality, and inaccuracies result
in verification requirements for micro task work. However,
manual verification of micro task work is subject to the same
human limitations. In an attempt to ensure quality of results
and minimize the impact of the human limitations of their
workers, requesters in centralized micro task structures set up
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

teams of up to 15 workers to perform the same task in an effort
to form a consensus.
40
The multiplication of work inherent in this
process significantly increases the cost of micro task work.
Requiring requesters to pay proportionally (e.g. up to 15 times)
for work per project results in waste. The necessity of
multiplication of work also subjects micro task workers to lower
rates and lack of payment increases.
By contrast, in the CRDAO platform, the community organization
software enables a readily available indicator of how reliable a
worker or requester is on the CRDAO network. The micro task
worker’s reputation score is a measure of the worker’s history
of completing micro tasks on the CRDAO network qualitatively
accurate, efficient, and consistent. The requester’s reputation
score is a measure of the requester’s history of interacting
with micro task workers on the CRDAO network. The CRDAO
reputation score is formed and linked to the respective network
participant’s wallet address.
Market factors balance the equilibrium of supply and demand of
micro work on the CRDAO Network based on the workers and
requesters reputation scores. If requesters have a lower
reputation score, workers become less likely to accept
requesters’ offers. In turn, low reputation scores for micro
task workers result in a lower likelihood of retention for micro
task work on the CRDAO Network. Requesters can select workers
based on their reputation score, giving workers an incentive to
keep the reputation scores high by performing micro tasks with
40 Neeraj Kumar, Effective Use of Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk); Tips and
techniques for better usage of Amazon Mechanical Turk for researchers, Neeraj
Kumar (May 2013, updated May 8, 2014), http://neerajkumar.org/writings/
mturk/; Rory O’Reilly, How the Gems Protocol Reduces Consensus by Redundancy,
GEMS (Nov. 27, 2017), https://blog.gems.org/how-the-gems-protocol-reduces-
consensus-by-redundancy- b151de80ecb8.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

high accuracy and efficiency. The reputation score mechanism and
the building of reputation on the CRDAO Platform allows workers
to graduate to the privilege of being a verifier. The reputation
score mechanism helps discern malicious actors and simple
mistakes. It also protects workers and verifiers from fraudulent
requesters and suboptimally designed requests.
In summary, the market factors and market dynamics related to
CRDAO reputation scores enable a lowering of the cost of
duplication as compared to centralized micro task work. If a
reliable and high reputation score worker completes the tasks,
the duplication may be brought from 15 to 5 or less in the
decentralized CRDAO setup. This enables unprecedented scaling of
micro task work.
Transaction Cost Minimization of Micro Task Work
The CRDAO removes transaction costs associated with micro task
work. Unlike centralized mechanical turk platforms that require
an existing banking relationship to receive account transfers
for otherwise unbanked micro task workers, the CRDAO operates
entirely through crypto transactions utilizing its reputation
tokens and other cryptocurrencies. This enables unbanked workers
to avoid opening a bank account to receive payments on
centralized mechanical turk platforms, such as Crowdflower or
MTurk. This, in turn, brings down transaction costs for mech
turk workers on the CRDAO substantially, especially in
comparison with micro task work in legacy and web2 markets. In
addition, this creates loyalty to the Code Review Platform.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

Optimizing Payment Systems in Micro Task Work
The CRDAO also improves the payment system for micro task
workers in centralized mechanical turk platforms by orders of
magnitude. Centralized mechanical turk platforms are subject to
significant payment issues and payment timing for their workers.
Workers are further burdened by high fees for intermediaries
that facilitate the payment process such as Paypal. The fees in
centralized mechanical turk platforms are only economically
viable for higher volume workers who can at some point avoid the
Paypal fees but create barriers to entry for new micro task
workers.
The CRDAO not only allows workers to get paid in CRDAO
proprietary CRDAO token tokens but also to capitalize on their
growing reputation stakes within the platform. The CRDAO
removes all non-CRDAO transaction fees for workers as only
requesters post ETH or other cryptocurrencies to request micro-
task completion. Holding and storing CRDAO proprietary tokens
does not necessitate a banking relationship. All that is needed
for a micro task worker to earn a living on the CRDAO is
access to the Internet.
Anonymity Facilitates Equity
Workers in the centralized micro task economy are required to
pass an approval process before they can start work. According
to a study by the World Bank, centralized approval processes and
identity requirements for mechanical turk worker registration
creates significant limitations for the registration of new
workers for micro task platforms. However, centralized micro
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

task platforms need to verify identity to prevent malicious
actors from abusing the network and ensure work quality.
By contrast, on the Code Review Platform, users do not need to
verify their identity to complete micro tasks. The CRDAO
architecture, and specifically its reputation token staking
mechanism, make the CRDAO attack resistant. This mechanism
enables the CRDAO to circumvent all the issues that are
associated with centralized identity verification processes.
Accordingly, workers in the Platform are not required to expense
money to qualify for centralized approval processes, don’t
experience delays, and are not required to surrender their
private information. Given those benefits, the CRDAO enhances
the labor pool of workers willing to provide micro tasks
services.
The CRDAO is built to facilitate such worker disclosures via
posts on the Forum. Alternatively, existing decentralized
onboarding processes, via Bloom and Ocular, among others, allow
the verification of worker identity information. The CRDAO
integrates such verified identification information through
posts on the Forum in the user interface.
Conclusion
The CRDAO provides key solutions for the existing problems of
modern code reviews in a fully decentralized community-driven
environment. As the CRDAO iterates on its design and moves
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

into subsequent phases, the larger web3 community will continue
to benefit from the key innovations.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4734750

