HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Wulf A. Kaal**
Abstract
Decentralized systems enhance future algorithmic applications.
Centralized algorithmic automation is a very powerful tool for
humanity. It fulfills increasingly important roles in society for the
betterment of humanity. It optimizes human interaction, outputs,
and performance and can elevate most functions of technology-
enhanced designs in society. At the same time, the conveniences
and benefits that derive from centralized algorithmic automation
bring with them risks to humanity that cannot be fully quantified.
Decentralized systems can help counteract the downsides and
threats of algorithmic automation and thereby enhance the long-
term benefits of technological solutions for humanity.
Key Words: Decentralization, AI, Algorithm, Future, New World,
Digital Assets, Decentralized Finance, Blockchain, Start-up,
Decentralized Commerce, Emerging Technology, Token Models,
Incentive Design, Tokens, Distributed Ledger Technology,
Decentralized Infrastructure
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
** Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis,
USA). The author is gratefull for ongoing discussions about decentralized
technology solutions with Craig Calcaterra. The author is also grateful for
outstanding research assistance from Hayley Howe and research librarian
assistance from Nicole Kinn. The author did not receive any form of financial
incentive for authoring this article.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Table of Contents
I. TECHNOLOGY-ENHANCED INDIVIDUALISM .......................................... 3
II. DECENTRALISM TRANSCENDS CAPITALISM AND SOCIALISM ................ 4
III. TECHNOLOGICAL MICRODEMOCRACY ............................................ 8
IV. ENHANCED ALGORITHMIC FUTURE .............................................. 12
V. DECENTRALIZED COMMERCE ........................................................... 16
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

I. Technology-Enhanced Individualism
Decentralized systems constitute a form of technology-
enhanced individualism. Individualism in this context means the
political philosophy that emphasizes the moral worth of
individuals and their importance over the state and social groups.1
Similarly, liberalism, anarchism, and existentialism focus on the
human individual in their analysis of society.2 Whereas these
political philosophies focused on the human individual’s role in
society with a strong emphasis on personal freedom, decentralized
systems focus more on the role of the individual and the
individual’s unique contributions to the collective reasoning
process that then advances or protects society. Individual freedom
is attained indirectly through the decentralized betterment of the
system and society. Decentralized systems enable a feedback
mechanism between unique individualist inputs and personal
individual freedoms. As the system improves with the quality of
unique individual inputs, the system increasingly values the
uniqueness of human inputs, and as a result, personal liberties and
freedom increase.
Features of collectivism in decentralized systems can be
distinguished from collectivism as a political philosophy.
Collectivism is defined as the practice or principle of giving a
group priority over the individuals in such group. In a perfect
world, decentralized systems recognize human individuals as ends
in themselves.3 In this sense, decentralized systems may be
contrasted with collectivism that sees individuals as means to an
end. Where collectivism emphasizes the cohesiveness among
individuals with prioritization of the group over the self,4
1 “The emancipation of the individual was indeed the great spiritual revolution
which had led to the breakdown of tribalism and to the rise of democracy. (...)
This individualism, united with altruism, has become the basis of our western
civilization. (...) There is no other thought which has been so powerful in the
moral development of man.” See Chapter 2, FN 23 [Popper, Chapter 6].
2 Wikipedia, Individualism, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individualism
(accessed June 1, 2020).
3 This is an analogy to Kant's central practical doctrine which recognizes that
human individuals are ends, and not to be used as means to an end. Kant,
Immanuel (1785). Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten [German]. Riga, J.F.
Hartknoch.
4 Wikipedia, Collectivism, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collectivism (accessed
June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
decentralized computing systems emphasize the wisdom of the
crowds through the unique individual inputs of the members of the
crowd. Decentralized computing systems and networks typically
intend prioritize network effects and the collective wisdom of the
group for the betterment of society. Where collectivism creates
limitations on individuals or demands sacrifices from individuals
for the benefit of the group, decentralized computing networks
emphasize the importance of the individual in the collective
engagement that in effect improves outcomes for the group. Where
collectivism would demand a sacrifice of personal fulfilment for
the group, decentralized systems would prioritize personal
fulfilment as it enhances unique inputs and innovation that
increase the collective wisdom of the group.
Decentralized technology enhances critical rationalism,
individualism, and the growth of human reason. Decentralization
can protect humanity from the corruptive influences of ethical
collectivism. Both liberalism and collectivism appeal to the
emotionally satisfying common purpose as a means of enhancing a
collective outcome for society. Appeals to a human individualistic
sacrifice for a common good is a form of ethical collectivism
which corrupts society and undermines reason and rational
thoughts of individuals.5
II. Decentralism Transcends Capitalism and Socialism
In the 20th and 21st centuries, human society and economic
systems have revolved around and evolved from political and
economic doctrines that seek to organize society effectively and
allocate resources efficiently for the betterment of humanity. First
5 “If the growth of reason is to continue, and human rationality to survive, then
the diversity of individuals and their opinion, aims, and purposes must never be
interfered with… . Even the emotionally satisfying appeal for a common
purpose, however, excellent, is an appeal to abandon all rival moral opinions
and the cross-criticisms and arguments to which they give rise. It is an appeal to
abandon rational thought.” Karl Popper ‘The Poverty of Historicism’; “What I
assert is that this moral principle which posits ‘the general good of society’ as a
moral aim, is not good enough as a basis of ethics; for example, that it leads to
lying – ‘ for the general good of society’ or ‘for the benefit of the city’. In other
words, I try to show that ethical collectivism is mischievous, that that it
corrupts. See Chapter 2, FN 23 [Popper].
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

and foremost among those are the dichotomies between capitalism
and socialism. Society is organized around those notions and has
formed power structures and political hierarchies to serve their
respective underlying ideas.
Differences between socialism and capitalism manifest
themselves in almost all metrics of societal organization. Very few
societies are exclusively run based on either capitalistic or
socialistic doctrine. Rather, policy in a given society is an
amalgamation of capitalistic ideas and socialistic ideas. The
degree of capitalistic ideas versus socialistic ideas in a given
society materialize through its adherence to basic metrics. Such
metrics may include notions of ownership, equality, the role of
government, markets, prices, efficiency, taxes, and healthcare,
among many others. Where capitalism sees ownership as assets
that are owned by private individuals and firms, socialism suggests
assets should be owned by co-operatives and by the government.
A core difference between socialism and capitalism revolves
around efficiency. Whereas capitalism suggest that market
incentives encourage firms to cut costs and increase efficiency of
operations, socialism is less focused on notions of efficiency as
government owned firms have fewer incentives to increase
efficiencies that create economies of scale. Where capitalism sees
equality created by markets and income determined by market
forces, socialism holds that private income should be redistributed
by a strong government to ensure equality of its citizens.
Similarly, taxes in capitalism are limited to limit government
spending, whereas socialist systems typically have high
progressive taxes combined with higher spending on public
services. Prices in capitalism are determined by market supply and
demand, whereas prices are subject to governmental price controls
in socialism.
The long-lasting debate on benefits and detriments of
capitalism and socialism is largely pointless. Capitalism has
advantages through a dynamic economy and strong incentives for
innovation and economic growth. By contrast, socialism has
significant strengths in the context of the promotion of equality
and its attempts to overcome market failure. Negative outcomes of
capitalism and socialism are equally bountiful. Capitalism can lead
to significant inequities, inequality, as well as monopolies, and
other market failures. Similarly, socialism has significant incentive
design issues, where hard work is not rewarded effectively and
external costs are largely ignored. More socialist systems are
afflicted with significant inefficiencies of state-run industries.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Decentralism transcends socialism and capitalism.
Decentralism posits that centralized coordination of societal and
economic activity, as instituted and instantiated in capitalistic or
socialistic doctrine, should be held to a minimum in order to free
the human potential. Decentralism constitutes a form of
technology-enhanced individualism that builds on and reforms
society’s existing infrastructure. Where the dichotomies between
capitalism and socialism focus on ownership as assets that are
owned either private individuals and firms (capitalism) or by co-
operatives and by the government (socialism), decentralism
focuses on the largest possible utility of assets through personal
ownership or collective ownership for human kind. Where the
dichotomies between capitalism and socialism focus on efficiency,
that is, whether market incentives encourage firms to cut costs and
increase efficiency of operations (capitalism) or the government
owned firms have fewer incentives to increase efficiencies that
create economies of scale (socialism), decentralism creates
efficiency not in linear forms but via higher levels of connectivity.
Where capitalism and socialism see equality created by markets
and income determined by market forces (capitalism) or holds that
private income should be redistributed by a strong government to
ensure equality of its citizens (socialism), decentralism creates
higher levels of equality in society through the preservation of
diversity of content, diversity of data sources, and enhanced node
connectivity. Where the dichotomies between capitalism and
socialism debate equitable redistribution by either curtailing taxes
to limit government spending and economic growth (capitalism) or
by increasing progressive taxes combined with higher spending on
public services (socialism), decentralism’s redistribution is based
on ownership rights in persons’ individuality-derived data that
creates economic value. Where capitalism is focused on
economies of scale, maximum production, and economic growth,
socialism is often seen as the antithesis with more focus on long-
term sustainable economic solutions through planning economies.
By contrast, decentralism is less concerned with economic growth
through per unit cost reduction, economies of scale, and the
associated negative externalities, but rather is focused on
connectivity and growth through network effects. As such,
negative externalities are minimized without centralized planning.
The transcendental nature of decentralism is manifested
through the instantiation of its core features in different systems
and contexts. For example, technology is largely limited to the
control of corporations (capitalism) or governments (socialism).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

By contrast, in decentralism, technologies are mostly shared to
create best solutions for humanity and not owned and controlled.
The open source movement, in its purest form, provides an
example of the power and use of technology for the greatest utility
of humanity. Similarly, the arts and sciences are subject of the
limitations of monetary quantification in both capitalism and
socialism. By contrast, because the arts and science help
proliferate unique skillsets and diversity of opinions, decentralism
values the arts and sciences disproportionately. Human rights,
access to resources, sustainability, freedom, peace and prosperity
are also protected at different levels in capitalistic or socialistic
societies. The highest protection of human rights, access to
resources, sustainability, freedom, peace and prosperity around the
globe is universally emphasized in the technology-enhanced
individualism of decentralism as each ensures the foundations of
human input into decentralized systems.
As compared with capitalism and socialism, the role of trust is
different in decentralism. In capitalism, trust in the system is
generated through trusted intermediaries and checks and balances.
Trust in socialism is created through belief in the infallibility of
government. By contrast, decentralism posits that trust in the
system should not be controlled by corruptible human constructs
and institutions that are controlled by a limited number of fallible
and corruptible humans. Rather, trust in decentralism is based on
technology-enhanced individualism. Trust depends on technology-
facilitated collective human action and as such belongs to the
majority, incorruptible by fallible individual action. Trust in
capitalism and socialism is partially created by legal guarantees
and by a judicial system that enforces such legal guarantees.
Legally created trust is often limited as it can be arbitrary because
it is only indirectly democratically legitimized, inflexible,
untimely, resistant to change, with fallible human-centric decision
processes, and human speed. Trust in decentralized legal solutions
can be more democratically legitimized through microdemocratic,
individualistic yet technology-centric autonomous decision
processes, coded guarantees, and machine speed.
Decentralism allows society to reevaluate its forms of
organization and production. Decentralized systems use elements
of profit generation and redistribution in a way that in effect
combines capitalistic and socialistic ideas. Decentralism allows for
the organization of society in economic structures that generate
profits while at the same time redistributing resources. For
example, DAOs combine elements of socialistic cooperatives with
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
the meritocracy and incentivization of capitalism. Another
example is provided by the ability to sell one’s personal (e.g.
social media etc. consumption) data, preferences, opinions etc. in
decentralized systems, including in real time. Such assets, e.g.
one’s data, preferences, opinions etc. can only limitedly be
commercialized in existing centralized structures. In decentralized
structures such assets can be tokenized, valued, and mobilized.
Similarly, tokenized hard assets, such as real-estate, can be
tokenized and sold in unprecedented fractional forms. The ability
to control one’s data and fractionalized (hard) assets enables new
forms of consumption for consumers. In early 2020, several
startups were developing a barter system in which services, such
as free car rides etc., become available in return for disclosure of
consumers’ data and personal preferences etc.
III. Technological Microdemocracy
“The printing press taught the people how
to read; the internet taught the people how
to write; decentralized technology taught
the people how to vote.”6
Representative democracies in the 21st century are subject to
significant shortcomings. The very notion of delegating one’s vote
to a third party without true knowledge of the ethics and belief
system of such a third party creates suboptimal outcomes.
Delegated voting on issues one cannot foresee corrupts. Voted
representatives are not incentivized to vote for outcomes that
reflect the presumptive wishes and needs of their constituents but
for maintaining their own power of office. Voting incentives and
outcomes are different in direct democratic votes. In ancient
Greece, citizens voted on any public issues directly on the town’s
square. Public issues that citizens engaged on in those days could
be as mundane as where to build the next road. Incentives, voting
outcomes, and democratic legitimacy were aligned in those days.
Democracy is increasingly under threat and needs upgrades.
Historically, it was not physically or technologically possible
for all constituents in a given democratically organized institution
or state to convene physically or digitally to vote on societal and
6 Wulf Kaal – December 20, 2019.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

public matters. To overcome these physical, practical, and
technological shortcomings, democratic societies devised a system
of democratic representation where only a limited number of
elected representatives makes decisions on behalf of their
constituents. Because of the technological, physical, and practical
limitations faced by early democracies, the downsides of
democratic representations, such as corruption, bribery, and
biases, had to be tolerated as inevitable and necessary tradeoffs.
The nature of delegating authority to representatives in
combination with boundedly rational human nature and lacking
incentivization for ethical conduct necessitated an external ex-post
monitoring system that attempts to remedy bribery, lobbying, bias,
coverups, and corruption. Ex-ante remedies to overcome these
downsides of representative democracies were not technologically
possible.
Microdemocratic principles can help overcome the existing
challenges of representative democracies. Microdemocratic
applications embrace technology to eliminate many of the
problems faced by representative democracies. For example,
internet-based technology and proper technological incentivization
can increase lacking voter participation that undermines
representative democracies. Experimentation with electronic forms
of voting allows new forms of allocating votes to prioritize
societal issues for each voter. Quadratic voting,7 for example,
allows a first glimpse of what may be possible in microdemocratic
voting structures. Each voter in a given microdemocratic voting
scenario may be allocated a maximum number of votes. Such
votes may be allocated by priority to any issues the respective
voter wants to engage with. The more important a given societal
issue is for a given voter, the more votes the voter will allocate to
the issue. For example, as more and more people become aware of
the climate crisis faced by humanity, they will increasingly
allocate their votes on issues that reflect their increasing
awareness. Change thus becomes tangible as people allocate their
votes prioritized by their then existing preferences and awareness.
7 Posner, Eric A., Weyl, E. Glen, Buterin, Vitalik, & Lanier, Jaron (2018).
Radical Markets: Uprooting Capitalism and Democracy for a Just Society.
Princeton University Press: N.J; Buterin, Vitalik, Hitzig, Zoe, & Weyl, E. Glen
(Dec. 2018). Liberal Radicalism: A Flexible Design for Philanthropic Matching
Funds, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3243656 (last
accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Moreover, part of the power of this microdemocratic approach
derives from the higher levels of knowledge a given voter has on a
particular issue that is evidenced by the voters’ proportional
allocation of votes on such issue. It is less likely that voters will
allocate number one priority on issues they know relatively little
about. Voting outcomes and their application and relevance to a
given constituent are thus presumably improved.
Microdemocracies would need to address the problem of the
tragedy of the commons. The concept of the tragedy of the
commons describes the downsides of a microdemocratic shared-
resource system for the common good of the society. In
microdemocratic systems, individual voters act independent of the
totality of voters according to their self-interest. Acting for their
own self-interest may be contrary to the common good of all
voters. Without controls, some self-interested voters may be
depleting or spoiling resources they share with the rest of society,
such as the environment, public goods, among others. Similarly,
majority rule may mean discrimination of the minority. A majority
that is unaffected by a rule they instantiate may have a
discriminatory impact on a minority that is disproportionately
affected by the change in the rules.
A key advantage of a microdemocracy is the speed of change it
can initiate. In the early 2020s, representative democracies were
largely slow and inflexible because of their constitutional and
institutional infrastructure and their respective legal systems.
Change typically depended on the election of a new government
after, typically, around 4 years at the earliest. By contrast,
microdemocratic voting would be a more immediate feedback
system between voters and their representatives. Because
technology enables the incorruptible counting and tallying of votes
instantaneously, voting can be more dynamic and incremental and
political will is exercised more directly.
Decentralized technologies provide inherent microdemocratic
features that can help instantiate microdemocratic principles and
processes in society. Decentralized technologies can help bring
more direct microdemocratic representation to society.
Decentralized technology enables smaller scale democratic
decisions at unprecedented scale. In the early 21st century, internet
platform businesses and social media companies inaugurated new
forms of voting. The “Like” button, while deeply-flawed in its
incentive design and voting-related outcomes, inaugurated a new
form of voting on social outcomes and, at the same time, trained
the voting public to engage more directly with voting related
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

outcomes. Decentralized technologies create extensions of these
forms of more direct democratic votes. Unlike their centralized
predecessors, decentralized technologies, for the first time in
history, enable improved incentive designs that help overcome the
insufficiencies in voting outcomes of representative democracies.8
As voting pools in decentralized systems increase, deepen, and
proliferate, they can become supplemental voting systems that
help overcome the lack of legitimacy and improve representative
democracies. Of course, such upgrades to existing representative
democracies may require constitutional or democratic support
which is dubious at best.
Decentralized technology can improve voting technology in
representative democracies. Voting technologies in existing
representative democracies were woefully outdated at the
beginning of the 21st century. Since Gore vs. Bush,9 which
necessitated reexamination of punch holes in paper voting cards,
existing voting systems with analog or paper technology have
been proven suboptimal. But the problems with existing voting
systems do not stop with technology. Redistricting, that is,
changing the demarcation of a given voting district to adjust to
voter preferences therein and change overall voting outcomes, and
other basic democratic voting-related issues show that voting and
the democratic institutions built to facilitate basic tenets of
representative democracies have been under attack and require
updates. Decentralized technologies have technological features
that can provide solutions. But, such solutions also require
political will. For example, voting on a public blockchain that
overcomes the trilemma of blockchains (decentralization, scaling,
security) may become a core application of the technology. Yet,
governments in the existing representative democracies may not
wish to surrender control over the voting process and may prefer
to use private blockchains to facilitate voting outcomes.
Decentralized technologies have the capacity to change the
incentive design for voting which helps address some of the
dangers presented by existing internet voting.
Centralized technology companies increasingly act like
governments. For example, Microsoft announced in January 2020
8 For more details see Chapter [___].
9 Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S. 98 (2000).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
that it would open a representation to the United Nations.10 In
2020, executives of the top technology companies were added to
list of attendees at the annual security conference, a position that
was previously reserved exclusively for presidents, prime
ministers, and politicians. Regulating the increasing power of
centralized technology conglomerates only addresses part of the
issues. Even if fully regulated, centralized technology
conglomerates still have the power to set standards and norms for
emerging technologies that government cannot effectively trace.
Microdemocratic decision making helps set such standards outside
of the control metrics imposed by the centralized technology
conglomerates.
IV. Enhanced Algorithmic Future
Decentralized systems enhance future algorithmic applications.
Centralized algorithmic automation is a very powerful tool for
humanity. It fulfills increasingly important roles in society for the
betterment of humanity. It optimizes human interaction, outputs,
and performance and can elevate most functions of technology-
enhanced designs in society. At the same time, the conveniences
and benefits that derive from centralized algorithmic automation
bring with them risks to humanity that cannot be fully quantified.
Decentralized systems can counteract the downsides and threats of
algorithmic automation and thereby enhance the long-term
benefits of technological solutions for humanity.
Centralized algorithmic automation is affecting society at a
large scale. Since the early 2010s, algorithmic functionalities and
algorithms that utilize big data from sensors, IoT devices, and
other big datasets, have started to take over significant societal
functions. As internet-based applications are becoming
increasingly prevalent and used by humans, such as Google,
Facebook, and Amazon, such applications not only provide
conveniences in humans’ daily lives but also start accumulating
more and more power through their functionalities in society. For
example, a powerful application such as Google has already a lot
of control over human knowledge and thought. If it were to make
disparate recommendations to similarly situated users, it could
10 Schaake, Marietje (Feb. 20, 2020). Big Tech Companies Want to Act Like
Governments [Opinion]. Financial Times (FT.com).
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

control societal outcomes by benefiting one user group with better
predictions and outcomes over another user group.
Algorithmic functions can optimize bounded human rationality
that has afflicted humanity since its inception. Human actions and
associated outcomes are increasingly optimized through the
availability of big data and algorithmic data analytics. For
example, the increasing availability of health data and analytics
lowers the likelihood of suboptimal human health-related choice,
especially if reinforced with algorithmic applications that interact
with humans. The quantification of human thought, feeling, and
action and their algorithmic optimization can create optimization
of humans that is too complex for humans to understand without
the data-driven algorithmic aids. Health data through sensors,
wearables etc. and sensors that observe human interaction with
content on, for instance, a Kindle that scans health data while
humans interact with text and other content, provide some context.
Given the analytical and predictive skills of algorithmic
applications, data and algorithmic oracles can not just upgrade
human action, experiences, and outputs, they can also upgrade
otherwise human-generated collective societal functions. For
example, algorithmic applications can incrementally upgrade
democratic processes in society. Big data and algorithmic data
analytics enable centralized algorithmically automated systems
(such as Google, Facebook, and Amazon in the early 2020s) to
know individuals’ political preferences better than the individual’s
themselves.11 Algorithmic data analytics-driven human choice
removes humans’ bounded rationality.12 As algorithmic analytics
and predictions of human preferences and choice become
increasingly accepted, exercising human political will by proxy
through algorithmic interpretations may become increasingly the
new normal in the foreseeable future.
Decentralized systems’ ability to preserve the human element
and coordinate human input enables the enhancements of
11 See further Kahneman, Daniel, Fredrickson, Barbara L., Schreiber, Charles
A., & Redelmeier, Donald A. (Nov. 1993). When More Pain is Preferred to
Less: Adding a Better End. Psychological Science, 4:6, 401-405.
12 Kahneman’s cold water experiments suggest that humans listen to a narrating
self in political decision making, follow a peak-end rule, forget the vast
majority of political events during a given legislation period, focus exclusively
on a few extreme outlier events, and give largely disproportionate weight in
political decision making to the most recent events. Ibid.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
algorithmic automation. In its ultimate state, algorithmic
automation negates human input in data systems as humans’
bounded rationality creates inefficiencies and the human condition
results in suboptimal outputs, even when algorithmically
optimized. Decentralized systems’ interaction with and
optimization of algorithmic societal functions overcomes
centralized algorithmic automation’ negative effects on equity,
individualism, individual choice, free will, and diversity of human
experiences, as we will further explain in chapter [____]. A
feedback loop exists between decentralized protection of the
human factor in algorithmic systems and the proliferation of both
algorithmic automation and decentralized solutions.
Decentralized enhancements of algorithmic automation
become more evident when comparing decentralized systems and
centralized algorithmic automation. Key differences exist between
the approaches and outcomes of decentralized systems and
centralized algorithmic automation. Where centralized algorithmic
automation would use centrally collected data analytics to enhance
decision making metrics and associated outcomes, decentralized
systems would make recommendations based on the wisdom of
the crowds of humans, machines, and other entities combined.
Where centralized algorithmic automation would systematically
remove the human presence in an effort to optimize efficiency and
outcomes, decentralized systems would use the power of
algorithmic applications to enhance its features and outcomes with
an omnipresent human backstop. Where centralized algorithmic
automation would create an autocracy powered by centralized
algorithmic human predictors, decentralized systems would create
a meritocracy powered by optimized human decisions that
increase diversity of choice for all. Where centralized algorithmic
automation would create structures for the evolution of dataism,
decentralized systems would attempt to remove the human
condition, that is, remove the human shortcomings associated with
bounded rationality and limited foresight that lead to suboptimal
outcomes, with a view towards enhancing individualism for the
benefit of humanity. Where centralized algorithmic automation
would harmonize to enhance efficiency and associated outcomes,
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

decentralized systems would emphasize diversity to improve
outcomes.13
Decentralized systems are uniquely positioned to make
recommendations for and improve human and societal functions
that are algorithmically generated. Unlike centralized
algorithmically enhanced systems that use centrally collected data
and analytics to enhance human decision-making metrics and
associated outcomes, decentralized systems can use the combined
wisdom of the crowds of humans, machines, and other entities.
Decentralized systems can use uniquely diverse human inputs that
over time can become automated in their applications but remains
foundationally based on a human consensus that functions as a
human backstop for automated algorithmic applications. For
example, in the early 2020s, cryptocurrency startups have started
to experiment with voting metrics, voting incentive designs, and
voting outcomes. These evolving blockchain-based designs with
human voting inputs can over time become automated. The basis
of the evolving automated algorithmic designs remains a diverse
human voting record. Because of its blockchain-based quasi-
precedent nature with a human backstop, the decentralized system
enables built-in checks and balances that can support resistance to
even the most apocalyptic applications and takeover of algorithmic
systems in human society that systematically attempt to remove
the human presence in an effort to optimize efficiency and
outcomes.
The enhancements offered by decentralized systems can be
identified largely through the autocratic tendencies of algorithmic
applications versus the microdemocratic tendencies of
decentralized systems. Centralized algorithmic human predictors
can be used by those few entities and individuals who control the
data flow and the associated algorithms to create autocratic
algorithmic systems and structures. The implied loss of democratic
principles in society is perhaps an inevitable side effect. By
contrast, decentralized systems thrive through diversity of human
input and human experiences that enable smaller scale democratic
decisions at unprecedented scale. Decentralized systems can
further enhance their inherent microdemocratic processes and
outputs through meritocratic principles that optimize incentive
13 As Karl Popper put it: “The growth of knowledge depends entirely on
disagreement”, Popper, Karl R. (1994). The Myth of the Framework: In Defence
of Science and Rationality. Routledge: London.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
designs and human decision making. For example, at the
beginning of the 2020s, blockchain startups experimented with
censor-proof, incorruptible, anonymous, and autonomous voting
systems that required proof of voting pool validation of human
inputs.
The enhancement of individualism is a key feature that
distinguishes decentralized systems from centralized algorithmic
automation and underscores its value proposition. Where
centralized algorithmic automation would harmonize,
decentralized systems would emphasize diversity for improved
outcomes. Because of it autocratic and efficiency focused
tendencies, centralized algorithmic automation is prone to create
structures for the evolution of dataism, which ultimately denies the
value of human inputs and individualism. By contrast,
decentralized systems depend on and enhanced individualism.
Decentralized systems thrive through human diversity. Unlike
centralized algorithmic automation that ultimately attempts to
remove the human inefficiencies in the system, decentralized
systems create structures that enable incentive designs that help
overcome human shortcomings associated with bounded
rationality and limited foresight. These optimizations create a
decentralized form of efficiency enhancement that reconciles with
individualism for the benefit of humanity. For example, in the
early 2020s, blockchain startups have started to experiment with
tokenized incentive designs intended to overcome bounded
rationality and limited foresight.
V. Decentralized Commerce
Decentralized technology solutions create disruptions for
existing legacy commerce. The emergence and proliferation of
distributed blockchain applications (DApps) in the aftermath of
the invention of the Bitcoin protocol in 2009 demonstrate that a
nascent market for such applications and consumer demand
already exists at the beginning of the 2020s. Consumer preferences
continue to shape the DApps market and the solutions it may offer
for commerce and society. A significant market for blockchain
applications will be the corporate marketplace, banks, legal, realty,
and insurance. These market will all be impacted very
significantly. DApps create solutions for business and society that
are subject to far fewer and rather different transaction costs
compared with centralized legacy businesses in the same
industries. Through code-based solutions, DApps can help
increase the overall trust of consumers and market participants at
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

an unprecedented scale. Despite many cybersecurity issues
associated with cryptocurrencies, among others, code-based trust
can help lower transaction costs, but it also increases consumer
and overall market confidence and certainty, which facilitate
economies of scale that are rarely possible in centralized
structures. Through the lower cost structure, decentralized
platforms have the ability to remove consumer fees that are an
integral part of their centralized competitor businesses. Removing
such centralized fees also allows for the removal of downward
pressure on the platforms’ worker compensation as costs are less
likely to increase and be passed on to workers and consumers. The
lack of fees can help create a more efficient marketplace through
the removal of the rent seeking intermediators.
Decentralized technologies’ ability to lower transaction costs
by removing otherwise needed intermediaries disrupts existing
business models that are based on intermediation. For example, in
the early 2020s blockchain technology provided numerous
examples of evolving decentralized technologies that create an
independent and transparent platform for establishing truth and
building trust. Intermediaries, bureaucracy and old-fashioned
procedures are replaced by: code, connectivity, crowds, and
collaboration. An example here is the decentralized finance (DeFi)
market where increasingly financial products are offered on top of
digital assets to facilitate disintermediation of legacy systems. The
technology increases openness and speed, while at the same time
significantly reducing costs by replacing intermediaries in, for
example, traditional finance. But perhaps the most significant
feature of blockchain technology is that it is so adaptable. The
many applications of evolving blockchain technology have the
potential to change business models. Because of its implicit code-
based guarantees, the technology allows a qualitatively different
solution for agency, a foundational element of capitalism.
Blockchain technology can replace agency constructs for many
business relationships. The guarantees ensure that participant
cannot circumvent the rules embedded in the code, contracts
execute only if and when all contract parameters were fulfilled by
both parties and verified by a majority of miners/nodes in the
system. Blockchain-based guarantees remove agency costs
because principals are less required to institute oversight and
monitoring of agents which addresses the inherent agency
problems in modern finance and corporate governance.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Similarly, decentralized technologies reform business,
administrative, and legal processes that rely on intermediaries.
Any such processes may be updated for decentralized
technologies. For example, corporate processes that have ledger
functionality but rely on legal intermediaries could be streamlined
very quickly by implementing blockchain technology. When
blockchain technology becomes more widely accepted and
applications spread into consumer-facing markets, legacy business
processes and structures will likely be among the first to be
amended. The combination of blockchain technology startups with
platforms, AI, and machine learning present enormous
opportunities to improve humanity. Especially if these
technologies are used in combination with big data that is
collected by using tech solutions and blockchain applications in
combination with machine learning, it may be increasingly
possible to create more creative and faster tools. This, in turn,
creates a surge of new and innovative platforms with disruptive
effects for many industries.
Decentralized payment systems’ ability to rely entirely on
cryptocurrencies creates comparative advantages over centralized
systems. Centralized legacy fiat payment systems and platforms
typically require some form of an existing banking relationship in
order for consumers to utilize their services. Holding and storing
cryptocurrencies does not require a banking relationship. While
many legacy banks are cognizant of their limitations and are ready
to embrace cryptocurrencies, centralized legacy fiat payment
systems remain subject to payment processing issues and slow
processing times for payments. They also require high fees for
intermediaries that facilitate the payment process such as banks
and PayPal, among others. The fees make it only economically
viable for higher volumes of transactions, creating barriers to entry
in the process. Decentralized payment systems are not subject to
these limitations. Finally, while money laundering has
traditionally been a problem in these markets, anonymity of
market participants in cryptocurrency networks can also increase
participation in certain markets and economies. As the technology
and its uses evolve, traditional markets are increasingly
encapsulated by it.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

Legacy payment systems, cash, and bank notes are gradually
losing ground to other payment systems.14 At the beginning of the
2020s, in Northern Europe, as few as one in every five
transactions is made in cash.15 cash usage in the United States, the
United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, Finland, Canada,
France, among other industrialized nations, has fallen well below
50% of total transaction volume.16 In the United States, transacting
in cash costs the consumer around 200 billion dollars annually—
about $637 per person annually, which is a result of the cost of
production, storage, and transportation, among other factors. 17
The end of technological life cycles of legacy systems in the
early 2020s and associated emerging trends in payment systems
necessitate central banks’ enhanced examination of alternative
payment systems.18 Central banks and governments around the
world have been experimenting with government-sponsored
digital and cryptocurrencies since 2015.19 In the case of central
14 Rogoff, Kenneth S. (2016). The Curse of Cash. Princeton: Princeton
University Press: Princeton; Brugge, Jonathan, Denecker, Olivier, Jawaid,
Hamza, Kovacs, Andras, & Shami, Ibrahim (Aug. 20, 2018). Attacking the
Cost of Cash. McKinsey & Company: Our Insights,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/attacking-
the-cost-of-cash (accessed June 1, 2020).
15 Ibid.
16 Ibid.
17 Ibid. The cost of cash is primarily associated with counting, managing,
storing, transporting, guarding, and accounting for bank notes. Berensten,
Aleksander & Schar, Fabian (2018). The Case for Central Bank Electronic
Money and the Non-case for Central Bank Cryptocurrencies. Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis Review, 100:2, 97-106; The theft of cash alone costs U.S.
retail businesses losses around $40 billion annually. Yakowicz, Will (Sept. 20,
2013). Cash Costs U.S. Businesses $40 Billion a Year. Inc.,
https://www.inc.com/will-yakowicz/dealing-with-cash-costs-american-
businesses-55-billion.html (accessed June 1, 2020).
18 Bech, Morten & Garratt, Rodney (2017). Central Bank Cryptocurrencies.
BIS Quarterly Review.
19 Hileman, Garrick & Rauchs, Michel (2017). Global Cryptocurrency
Benchmarking Study. Cambridge Cenre for Alternative Finance,
https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/research/centres/alternative-
finance/downloads/2017-04-20-global-cryptocurrency-benchmarking-study.pdf
(accessed June 1, 2020); Mersch, Yves (July 24, 2017). Central Bank Speech
at the Cent. Bank of Malaysia Monetary Policy Conference [transcript available
at https://www.bis.org/review/r170807c.htm]; Digital Currency Initiative, MIT
Media Lab, https://dci.mit.edu; Monetary Authority of Singapore, Financial
Stability Review (Nov. 2017), https://www.mas.gov.sg/-
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
banks, such experimentation was already close to launch20 or
fully operational in the early 2020s.21 Most major tech companies
in the private sector have been experimenting with cryptocurrency
projects since 2017. Several governments have issued their own
digital currencies. Examples include Tunisia (eDinar),22 Senegal
/media/MAS/resource/publications/fsr/FSR-2017.pdf; Meaning, Jack, Dyson,
Ben, Barker, James & Clayton, Emily (May 2018). Broadening Narrow Money:
Monetary Policy with a Central Bank Digital Currency. Bank of England [Staff
Working Paper No. 724]; Koning, J.P. (2016). Fedcoin: A Central Bank-Issued
Cryptocurrency, R3 Report, 15; Motamedi, Sina (July 21, 2014). Will Bitcoins
Ever Become Money? A Path to Decentralized Central Banking,
TannuTuva.org, https://tannutuva.org/2014/will-bitcoins-ever-become-money-
a-path-to-decentralized-central-banking.
20 The Bank of Canada and Bank of England announced in 2016 that the
technology was not ready for a central bank-sponsored cryptocurrency. Yet
other central banks, such as in Singapore and Sweden, have already launched
their e-currency projects. See Chapter 4, footnote 18.
21 Chohan, Usman W. (Feb. 7, 2018). Cryptocurrencies as Asset-Backed
Instruments: The Venezuelan Petro [unpublished paper],
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3119606; Zagaris, Bruce
(2018). U.S. Bans Venezuela's New Cryptocurrency and Adds 3 Officials to
Sanctions List. International Enforcement Law Reporter, 34:3, 157-161;
Hirschfeld Davis, Julie & Popper, Nathaniel (Mar. 20, 2018). White House
Bans Venezuela's Digital Currency and Imposes Further Sanctions. New York
Times, A1.
22 Kastelein, Richard (Dec. 28, 2015). Tunisia to Replace Its National Digital
Currency, eDinar, with Blockchain-Driven Monetas Currency. Blockchain
News, https://www.the-blockchain.com/2015/12/28/tunisia-to-replace-its-
national-digital-currency-edinar-with-blockchain-driven-monetas-currency/
(accessed June 1, 2020).
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

(eCFA),23 Sweden (eKrona),24 Dubai (EmCash),25 Japan
(Jcoin),26 Estonia (Estcoin),27 and Ecuador,28 among others.29
23 Das, Samburaj (Nov. 28, 2016). Senegal Will Introduce a Blockchain-Based
National Digital Currency. CCN, https://www.ccn.com/senegal-will-introduce-
blockchain-based-national-digital-currency/.
24 Afraid of a few commercial entities controlling cash supply in Sweden, the
Swedish central bank has kicked off its digital currency project e-krona. Billner,
Amanda (Oct. 26, 2018). Now There are Plans for 'e-Krona' in Cash-Shy
Sweden. Bloomberg: Economics,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-10-26/riksbank-to-develop-
pilot-electronic-currency-amid-cash-decline.
25 Buck, Jon (Oct. 1, 2017). Dubai Will Issue First Ever State Cryptocurrency.
Cointelegraph, https://cointelegraph.com/news/dubai-will-issue-first-ever-state-
cryptocurrency.
26 Kharpal, Arjun (Sep. 27, 2017). Japanese Banks are Thinking of Making
Their Own Cryptocurrency Called the J-Coin. CNBC: Tech Transformers,
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/09/27/japanese-banks-cryptocurrency-j-coin.html.
27 Korjus, Kaspar (Dec. 18, 2017). We're Planning to Launch estcoin - and
That's Only the Start. Medium, https://medium.com/e-residency-blog/were-
planning-to-launch-estcoin-and-that-s-only-the-start-310aba7f3790.
28 Rosenfeld, Everett (Feb. 9, 2015). Exuador Becomes the First Country to
Roll Out Its Own Digital Cash. CNBC.com,
https://www.cnbc.com/2015/02/06/ecuador-becomes-the-first-country-to-roll-
out-its-own-digital-durrency.html.
29 Thomson Reuters (Oct. 25, 2017). Cryptocurrencies by Country,
https://blogs.thomsonreuters.com/answerson/world-cryptocurrencies-country/.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Bibliography
Bech, Morten & Garratt, Rodney (2017). Central Bank
Cryptocurrencies. BIS Quarterly Review.
Berensten, Aleksander & Schar, Fabian (2018). The Case for
Central Bank Electronic Money and the Non-case for Central
Bank Cryptocurrencies. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review, 100:2, 97-106.
Billner, Amanda (Oct. 26, 2018). Now There are Plans for 'e-
Krona' in Cash-Shy Sweden. Bloomberg: Economics,
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-10-
26/riksbank-to-develop-pilot-electronic-currency-amid-cash-
decline.
Browne, Ryan (Feb. 20, 2018). Venezuela About to Pre-Sell
'Petro' Cryptocurrency, and Other Countries Could Follow.
CNBC.com, https://www.cnbc.com/2018/02/19/venezuela-
petro-cryptocurrency-pre-sale-starts-february-20.html.
Brugge, Jonathan, Denecker, Olivier, Jawaid, Hamza, Kovacs,
Andras, & Shami, Ibrahim (Aug. 20, 2018). Attacking the
Cost of Cash. McKinsey & Company: Our Insights,
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-
insights/attacking-the-cost-of-cash (accessed June 1, 2020).
Buck, Jon (Oct. 1, 2017). Dubai Will Issue First Ever State
Cryptocurrency. Cointelegraph,
https://cointelegraph.com/news/dubai-will-issue-first-ever-
state-cryptocurrency.
Bush v. Gore, 531 U.S. 98 (2000).
Buterin, Vitalik, Hitzig, Zoe, & Weyl, E. Glen (Dec. 2018).
Liberal Radicalism: A Flexible Design for Philanthropic
Matching Funds [unpublished article],
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3243656
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Chohan, Usman W. (Feb. 7, 2018). Cryptocurrencies as Asset-
Backed Instruments: The Venezuelan Petro [unpublished
article],
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3119606.
Das, Samburaj (Nov. 28, 2016). Senegal Will Introduce a
Blockchain-Based National Digital Currency. CCN,
https://www.ccn.com/senegal-will-introduce-blockchain-
based-national-digital-currency/.
Digital Currency Initiative, MIT Media Lab, https://dci.mit.edu;
Hileman, Garrick & Rauchs, Michel (2017). Global
Cryptocurrency Benchmarking Study. Cambridge Centre for
Alternative Finance,
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

https://www.jbs.cam.ac.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/research/cen
tres/alternative-finance/downloads/2017-04-20-global-
cryptocurrency-benchmarking-study.pdf (accessed June 1,
2020);
Hirschfeld Davis, Julie & Popper, Nathaniel (Mar. 20, 2018).
White House Bans Venezuela's Digital Currency and Imposes
Further Sanctions. New York Times, A1.
Kahneman, Daniel, Fredrickson, Barbara L., Schreiber, Charles
A., & Redelmeier, Donald A. (Nov. 1993). When More Pain is
Preferred to Less: Adding a Better End. Psychological
Science, 4:6, 401-405.
Kant, Immanuel (1785). Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten.
Riga, J.F. Hartknoch.
Kastelein, Richard (Dec. 28, 2015). Tunisia to Replace Its
National Digital Currency, eDinar, with Blockchain-Driven
Monetas Currency. Blockchain News, https://www.the-
blockchain.com/2015/12/28/tunisia-to-replace-its-national-
digital-currency-edinar-with-blockchain-driven-monetas-
currency/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Kharpal, Arjun (Sep. 27, 2017). Japanese Banks are Thinking of
Making Their Own Cryptocurrency Called the J-Coin. CNBC:
Tech Transformers,
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/09/27/japanese-banks-
cryptocurrency-j-coin.html.
Koning, J.P. (2016). Fedcoin: A Central Bank-Issued
Cryptocurrency, R3 Report, 15
Korjus, Kaspar (Dec. 18, 2017). We're Planning to Launch
estcoin - and That's Only the Start. Medium,
https://medium.com/e-residency-blog/were-planning-to-
launch-estcoin-and-that-s-only-the-start-310aba7f3790.
Meaning, Jack, Dyson, Ben, Barker, James & Clayton, Emily
(May 2018). Broadening Narrow Money: Monetary Policy
with a Central Bank Digital Currency. Bank of England [Staff
Working Paper No. 724]
Mersch, Yves (July 24, 2017). Central Bank Speech at the Cent.
Bank of Malaysia Monetary Policy Conference [transcript
available at https://www.bis.org/review/r170807c.htm]
Monetary Authority of Singapore, Financial Stability Review
(Nov. 2017), https://www.mas.gov.sg/-
/media/MAS/resource/publications/fsr/FSR-2017.pdf
Motamedi, Sina (July 21, 2014). Will Bitcoins Ever Become
Money? A Path to Decentralized Central Banking,
TannuTuva.org, https://tannutuva.org/2014/will-bitcoins-ever-
become-money-a-path-to-decentralized-central-banking.
Popper, Karl R. (1994). The Myth of the Framework: In Defense of
Science and Rationality. Routledge: London.
Posner, Eric A., Weyl, E. Glen, Buterin, Vitalik, & Lanier, Jaron
(2018). Radical Markets: Uprooting Capitalism and
Democracy for a Just Society. Princeton University Press: N.J.
Rogoff, Kenneth S. (2016). The Curse of Cash. Princeton:
Princeton University Press: Princeton.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Rosenfeld, Everett (Feb. 9, 2015). Exuador Becomes the First
Country to Roll Out Its Own Digital Cash. CNBC.com,
https://www.cnbc.com/2015/02/06/ecuador-becomes-the-first-
country-to-roll-out-its-own-digital-durrency.html.
Schaake, Marietje (Feb. 20, 2020). Big Tech Companies Want to
Act Like Governments [Opinion]. Financial Times (FT.com).
Thomson Reuters (Oct. 25, 2017). Cryptocurrencies by Country,
https://blogs.thomsonreuters.com/answerson/world-
cryptocurrencies-country/.
Wikipedia, Collectivism,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collectivism (accessed June 1,
2020).
Wikipedia, Individualism,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individualism (accessed June 1,
2020).
Yakowicz, Will (Sept. 20, 2013). Cash Costs U.S. Businesses $40
Billion a Year. Inc.. https://www.inc.com/will-
yakowicz/dealing-with-cash-costs-american-businesses-55-
billion.html (accessed June 1, 2020).
Zagaris, Bruce (2018). U.S. Bans Venezuela's New
Cryptocurrency and Adds 3 Officials to Sanctions List.
International Enforcement Law Reporter, 34:3, 157-161.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

Bibliography
Amidor, Toby (May 10, 2019). Has Nutrition Really Changed
Over the Past 40 Years? U.S.News,
https://health.usnews.com/health-news/blogs/eat-
run/articles/how-the-dietary-guidelines-have-changed
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Brennan, Michael J. (1995). Corporate Finance Over the Past 25
Years. Financial Management, 24(2), 9.
Conway, Melvin E. (1968). How to Committees Invent?
Datamation, 14(5), 28-31.
Dai, Wei. "B-Money". Archived from the original on March 28,
2018, http://www.weidai.com/bmoney.txt (accessed June 1,
2020); May, Timothy C. (Nov. 24, 1992). The Crypto
Anarchist Manifesto, Activism.net,
https://activism.net/cypherpunk/crypto-anarchy.html (accessed
June 1, 2020).
Dubois, Hans F.W. & Fattore, Giovanni (2009). Definitions and
Typologies in Public Administration Research: The Case of
Decentralization. International Journal of Public
Administration, 32:8, 704-727.
Ecommerce News (June 18, 2013). Infographic: Ecommerce
Contribution in Europe,
https://ecommercenews.eu/infographic-ecommerce-
contribution-in-europe/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Etherdelta, https://etherdelta.com (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
IDEX, htps://idex.market/eth/idex (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
Jensen, Michael C. & Meckling, William H. (1976). Theory of the
Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownership
Structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3, 305.
Joint UNDP-Government of Germany (Oct. 1999).
Decentralization: A Sampling of Definitions [Working Paper],
http://web.undp.org/evaluation/documents/decentralization_wo
rking_report.PDF (accessed June 1, 2020).
Kaal, Wulf A. (2014), Evolution of Law: Dynamic Regulation in a
New Institutional Economics Framework. In Wulf A. Kaal
Mattias Schmidt, & Andreas Schwartze (Eds.), Festschrift zu
Ehren von Christian Kirchner. Mohr Siebeck.
Knowledge Standards Foundation [ks_found] (2019). Nonprofit
Defining Tech Standards for Encyclopedias [Tweet],
https://twitter.com/ks_found?lang=en (accessed June 1, 2020).
Kropotkin, Petr. (1896). The State: Its Historic Role,
https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/petr-kropotkin-the-state-
its-historic-role (accessed June 1, 2020).
Levitt, Steven D.. & Dubner, Steven J. (2006). Freakonomics : A
Rogue Economist Explores the Hidden Side of Everything.
New York: William Morrow.
OAX Foundation, https://www.oax.org (accessed Oct. 29, 2019).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

HOW DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS CAN UPGRADE AI
Popper, Karl (1966). The Open Society and Its Enemies.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
S.H. (June 4, 2014). No Monkey Business? The Economist,
https://www.economist.com/free-exchange/2014/06/04/no-
monkey-business (accessed June 1, 2020).
Sanger, Larry (2020). Larry Sanger: Education, Internet, and
More, https://larrysanger.org/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Scott, James C. (2012). Two Cheers for Anarchism: Six Easy
Pieces on Autonomy, Dignity, and Meaningful Work and Play.
Princeton; Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Shieffer, Andre & Vishny, Robert W. (1997). A Survey of
Corporate Governance. Journal of Finance, 52(2), 737-783.
Sunnarborg, Alex (June 11, 2017). ICO Investments Pass VC
Funding in Blockchain Market First. Coindesk,
https://www.coindesk.com/ico-investments-pass-vc-funding-
in-blockchain-market-first (accessed June 1, 2020).
Thaler, Richard H., & Sunstein, Cass R. (2008). Nudge :
Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
Underwood, Barbara D. (Sept. 18, 2018). Virtual Markets:
Integrity Report, Office of the New York State Attorney
General, https://virtualmarkets.ag.ny.gov/ (accessed June 1,
2020).
Wikipedia. Reproducibility Project,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reproducibility_Project
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superforecasting:_The_Art_and_
Science_of_Prediction (accessed June 1, 2020).
Wikipedia. Wilhelm Ropke,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wilhelm_R%C3%B6pke
(accessed June 1, 2020).
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808867

