S L
CHOOL OF AW
Legal Studies Research Paper Series
E L : D
VOLUTION OF AW YNAMIC
R N I
EGULATION IN A EW NSTITUTIONAL
E F
CONOMICS RAMEWORK
Festschrift in Honor of Christian Kirchner
(forthcoming 2013)
Wulf A. Kaal
Associate Professor of Law
University of St. Thomas School of Law
Legal Studies Research Paper No. 13-17
This paper can be downloaded without charge from
The Social Science Research Network electronic library at:
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2267560
A complete list of University of St. Thomas School of Law
Research Papers can be found at:
http://www.ssrn.com/link/st-thomas-legal-studies.html

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
Wulf A. Kaal
University of St. Thomas School of Law
1000 LaSalle Avenue
MSL 400
Minneapolis, MN 55403
USA
Kaal8634@stthomas.edu
EVOLUTION OF LAW: DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS
FRAMEWORK
BY
WULF A. KAAL *
FORTHCOMING IN FESTSCHRIFT IN HONOR OF CHRISTIAN KIRCHNER
ABSTRACT
The literature on New Institutional Economics (NIE) evaluates the
relationship between public and private rulemaking in the evolution of law. This
paper introduces the concept of dynamic regulation as an optimization process for
the learning experience in the NIE framework. Dynamic regulation describes
intra- and inter-jurisdictional feedback effects between different public
rulemakers and between private and public rulemakers. Dynamic elements in the
rulemaking process may increase the availability of relevant information for
rulemaking and may improve institutional design.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................... 2
II. DYNAMIC ELEMENTS IN THE EVOLUTION OF LAW ........................................................................... 2
1. Dynamic Regulation in the NIE Framework .................................................................................... 3
2. Feedback Effects ............................................................................................................................................ 4
3. Dynamic Regulation as Piecemeal Social Engineering ............................................................... 5
III. RULEMAKING IN A DYNAMIC FRAMEWORK ...................................................................................... 6
1. Formal vs. Informal Rules .......................................................................................................................... 7
2. Private vs. Public Rulemaking ................................................................................................................. 7
IV. DYNAMIC REGULATION IN THE INCOMPLETE CONTRACT MODEL ............................................. 9
1. Optimizing the Learning Process ............................................................................................................ 9
2. Organizational Culture ............................................................................................................................. 11
V. CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................................... 13
* Associate Professor, University of Saint Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis). The author would like
to thank Rudolf Richter for his comprehensive comments. He is also grateful to research librarian Valerie
Aggerbeck for outstanding support.
1

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
I. Introduction
The New Institutional Economics (NIE) studies the development, functioning,
and improvement of institutions (Furubotn and Richter 2005; North 1990; Richter and
Furubotn 2003; Williamson 1985; Voigt 2009; Kirchner 2007; Coase 1998; Williamson
1979). To the extent that legal rules can be defined as institutions, NIE views rulemaking
as part of the evolution of institutions (Kirchner 2011). Popper’s piecemeal social
engineering, as opposed to utopian social engineering (Popper 1957)1 provides general
guidance for the design of institutions.
Economists have previously described the concept of dynamic regulation in the
context of innovation and learning by doing (Lewis and Yildirim 2002), principal-agent
and adverse-selection problems (Litwack 1992), continuing regulatory relationships
(Baron and Besanko 1984), and regulation of quality (Auray, Mariotti and Moizeau 2011).
The largest body of scholarship applies the concept of dynamic regulation in the context
of telecommunication markets (van Dijk and Mulder 2005; Bijl and Peitz 2004; Bauer
and Bohlin 2008). Dynamic regulation as part of institutional design in the evolution of
law has not been systematically analyzed.
This paper introduces the concept of dynamic regulation as an optimization
method for institutional design. Building on Christian Kirchner’s “interplay between
public and private rulemaking in the evolution of law” (Kirchner 2011), the author
develops a methodological structure for dynamic regulation from the perspective of New
Institutional Economics. After a short introduction in Part I, the author in Part II suggests
that dynamic regulation epitomizes Popper’s piecemeal engineering as opposed to
utopian social engineering. The author outlines NIE’s methodological framework as it
relates to dynamic regulation and describes dynamic elements via feedback effects in the
evolution of law. Part III discusses rulemaking in a dynamic framework and suggests that
NIE’s distinction between formal and informal rules has an application in a dynamic
framework for rulemaking. Similarly, the feedback effect between private and public law
can be conceptualized in a dynamic framework as a learning process. Part IV shows how
dynamic elements in the learning process can help optimize the learning process for
rulemaking in the incomplete contract model. Dynamic regulation may be viewed as part
of the organizational culture of rulemaking.
II. Dynamic Elements in the Evolution of Law
Dynamic and anticipatory elements in rules were less topical at the inception of
institutional arrangements for rulemaking. Indeed, the institutional infrastructure for
rulemaking was geared towards the creation of rules for governing a relatively stable
society with less upward mobility and relatively stable economic and market
environments. Since then, society and markets have evolved rapidly and are becoming
increasingly more complex. The growing number of rule enactments, revisions, and
revocations suggests that existing rules and institutional structures for rulemaking are
becoming less capable of addressing the rapid pace of change. Financial innovation and
the complexities of financial markets require institutional arrangements and a rulemaking
1 Popper 1957 “… [the] piecemeal engineer knows [. . . ] that we can learn only from mistakes [. . . ] and he
will avoid undertaking reforms of a complexity and scope which makes it impossible for him to disentangle
causes and effects, and to know what he is really doing.” Ibid.
2

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
process that continuously adjust to these challenges. In other words, the complexities of
today’s society and markets may benefit from dynamic institutional arrangements and
processes for rulemaking.
1. Dynamic Regulation in the NIE Framework
Evolutionary economics provides various approaches to study the evolution of
rulemaking (Schumpeter 1911/1987; North 1990; von Hayek 1968; Nelson and Winter
1982). It offers some guidance on the role of dynamic regulation in the evolution of
rulemaking.
NIE shares some core assumptions with the neoclassical model, such as
methodological individualism, scarcity of resources, and self-interested rational behavior
(Furubotn and Richter 2005; Arrow 1994; Mantzavinos 2001). Rulemaking is a strategy
used to address the scarcity of resources. In an effort to address the scarcity of resources,
individual actors cooperate and coordinate the division of labor with other actors.
Enforceable rules optimize actors’ coordination and decision-making. The optimization
of rulemaking through the use of dynamic elements can be seen as an economizing
device that addresses the scarcity of resources.
In contrast to the neoclassical model, NIE emphasizes that information is
systematically incomplete (Voigt 2009, 237–38) and that individuals are boundedly
rational (Kirchner 2001; Voigt, 22-23; Conslik 1996; Selten 1990; Simon 1957/1982) and
act opportunistically (Voigt, 88-89; Furubotn and Richter 2005, 5). Rulemaking under
conditions of incomplete information and bounded rationality can lead to suboptimal
outcomes that may require rule revision and/or additional rulemaking. This trial-and-error
process (Kirchner 2011, 164; Popper 1957, 88) is suboptimal for rulemaking because,
rather than increasing the availability of relevant information ex-ante (through a dynamic
process as proposed in this paper), participating actors acquire the necessary information
ex-post after rules turn out to be suboptimal. Suboptimal rules necessitate costly rule
revisions, retractions, and additional rulemaking.
Building on Christian Kirchner’s “interplay between public and private
rulemaking in the evolution of law” (Kirchner 2011), this paper introduces the concept of
dynamic regulation as an optimization method for institutional design in the NIE
framework. The concept of dynamic regulation brings into play a feedback effect
between different public rulemakers as well as private and public rulemakers. The
feedback effect increases the availability of relevant information for rulemaking. At the
same time, the reduction of incomplete information in the rulemaking process enables the
rulemaker to modify the next action in the rulemaking process. Rulemaking thus becomes
focused on the timeliness and quality of available information. Recognizing the
incompleteness of information in the public rulemaking process, the public rulemaker
considers additional relevant information that private rulemakers and other public
rulemakers or their agents make available. After considering the available additional
information, the public rulemaker modifies the next action in the rulemaking process.
Supplementing the rulemaking process with dynamic elements expands the
availability of relevant information and increases the public rulemaker’s ability to adapt
public rules to unknown future states. Public rulemakers no longer acquire the necessary
information ex-post after rules have emerged as suboptimal, requiring rule revisions,
retractions, and additional rulemaking. Rather, the feedback effect between different
3

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
public rulemakers and public and private rulemakers increases the availability of relevant
information for public rulemaking ex-ante in a dynamic process. Dynamic elements in
the rulemaking process can thus improve public rulemaking by curtailing public trial-
and-error rulemaking.
2. Feedback Effects
Dynamic regulation can help improve institutional design via feedback effects.
The concept of dynamic regulation in the NIE framework recognizes that feedback
effects occur and suggests utilizing these feedback effects as dynamic elements for
institutional design. Feedback effects may occur both between outcomes and institutions
and between different rulemakers. Rules and rulemaking processes interact and evolve
over time. The concept of dynamic regulation suggests that interaction between different
rulemakers can create dynamic elements in the rulemaking process. These dynamic
elements in turn may create rules that entail dynamic elements and reinforce the dynamic
institutional design. Haavelmo describes feedback effects in the evolution of law:
Starting with some existing society we could conceive of it
as a structure of rules and regulations within which the
members of society have to operate. Their response to these
rules as individuals obeying them, produces economic
results that would characterize society. As the results
materialize they will stimulate the political process in
society towards changing the rules of the game. In other
words, the results of the individuals in a society responding
in a certain way to the original rules of the game have a
feedback effect upon these rules themselves. (1997, 15).
The interaction between rules and rulemaking processes and their evolution over
time constitute a feedback mechanism between outcomes and institutions. Rules as
outcomes are the result of the institutional design of rulemaking and reinforce the
institutional design. In other words, existing rules create a feedback effect for the
rulemaking process itself. Rules with suboptimal characteristics are the results of
institutional arrangements and reinforce suboptimal institutional arrangements and
rulemaking processes. Stable and presumptively optimal rules reinforce a rulemaking
process with an institutional structure that perpetuates stable elements in rules. Even if
institutional arrangements produce optimal governance solutions, these solutions can
become suboptimal over time, necessitating rule revision, updating, and revocation. Rules
that lack adaptability to future states of the world reinforce institutions and processes that
produce suboptimal outcomes.
Adaptable institutions may overcome suboptimal outcomes. The application and
adaptability of rules to future conditions depends on the institutions and processes put
into place to facilitate rulemaking. Adaptable institutions may utilize the feedback effect
between outcomes and institutions to reinforce dynamic elements in the rulemaking
process. Rules can be adaptable if institutions and rulemaking processes integrate
dynamic elements that produce timely, relevant, and decentralized information for
rulemaking. Dynamic elements in the rulemaking process may produce rules that have
enduring characteristics and are applicable and adaptable to future states of the world.
4

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
3. Dynamic Regulation as Piecemeal Social Engineering
Building on Popper’s piecemeal social engineering, dynamic regulation as a
piecemeal optimization process for institutional design may be viewed as a form of
piecemeal social engineering.
Popper distinguishes the piecemeal engineer from the holistic or utopian social
engineer (Popper 1957). The holist decides ex-ante that a complete reconstruction or
reformation of a given regulatory environment is possible. In practice, the holistic
approach continuously forces the holistic social engineer to fall back on piecemeal
improvisation (Popper 1957, 68).2 The centralized planning of the holistic social engineer
leads him to engage in unintended actions, which “leads to the notorious phenomenon of
unplanned planning.” (Popper 1957, 69). By contrast, Popper’s piecemeal engineer can
approach any given regulatory issue with an open mind as to the scope of the required
reform:
The difference between Utopian and piecemeal engineering
turns out, in practice, to be a difference not so much in scale
and scope as in caution and preparedness for unavoidable
surprises… Of these two doctrines, I hold that the one is true,
while the other is false and liable to lead to mistakes which are
both avoidable and grave… I hold that one is possible, while
the other simply does not exist: it is impossible. (1957, 69).
Dynamic regulation as a form of piecemeal social engineering is distinguishable
from the holistic approach. Rulemakers in a dynamic rulemaking environment approach
rulemaking and reform as a dynamic and evaluative process that requires perpetual
reexamination of continuously updating information. A presumption of reform feasibility
for a given regulatory environment is unnecessary because the feedback effect in
dynamic regulation makes ad-hoc decisions obsolete. Dynamic regulation increases the
availability of information ex-ante before rulemaking and allows decision-makers to
continuously evaluate a pending decision on institutional design. Centralized planning is
curtailed under dynamic regulation and unintended actions are minimized through the
feedback process. Unplanned planning is avoided and the emphasis in institutional design
shifts to caution and preparedness. Popper’s piecemeal social engineer:
will avoid undertaking reforms of a complexity and scope
which make it impossible for him to disentangle causes and
effects, and to know what he [the reformer] is really doing […
He] is always on the lookout for the unavoidable unwanted
consequences of any reform.” (1957, 67). [Finally,] when
trying to assess the likely consequences of some proposed
reform, the piecemeal technologist must do his best to
2
Popper’s critique of the holistic approach to social engineering includes a critique of holistic experiments:
“(a) […] piecemeal experiments … are fundamental for all social knowledge, pre-scientific as well as
scientific; (b) … holistic experiments are unlikely to contribute much to our experimental knowledge; and
that they can be called ‘experiments’ only in the sense in which this term is synonymous with an action
whose outcome is uncertain, but not in the sense in which this term is used to denote experimentation as “a
means of acquiring knowledge, by comparing the results obtained with the results expected” (1957, 85).
5

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
estimate the effects of any measure upon the ‘whole’ of
society. (1957, 68).
These features of piecemeal social engineering are directly applicable in the
framework for dynamic regulation. Because the feedback effects in dynamic regulation
allow rulemakers to increase the availability of relevant, decentralized, and timely
information for rulemaking, rulemakers can predict unforeseen contingencies and adjust
their actions ex-ante to avoid complex reforms. Feedback effects and the optimization of
information for rulemaking allow the rulemaker to distinguish causes for and effects of
rulemaking. Rules are promulgated only after the particularized need for rules has been
identified and possible effects on the society at large have been evaluated. Dynamic
regulation, thus, enables rulemakers to identify and avoid unwanted consequences.
Another important distinguishing feature of piecemeal social engineering is its
private rather than public character (Popper 1957, 67).3 Although dynamic rulemaking
includes public elements, its character is largely private. Feedback effects between public
and private rulemakers and the use of informal rules allow dynamic regulation to
integrate private information and institutions into the rulemaking process. Private
rulemakers in the dynamic regulation framework have a comparative advantage over
public rulemakers who do not have comparable access to timely and institution-specific
information. Consumer choice also plays a role in dynamic regulation and helps to
characterize it as private. The largely private character of dynamic regulation in
combination with its piecemeal optimization features for rulemaking underscores its
affiliation with piecemeal social engineering.
III. Rulemaking in a Dynamic Framework
NIE’s emphasis on the development, functioning, and improvement of institutions
(Furubotn and Richter 2005; North 1990; Richter and Furubotn 2003; Williamson 1985;
Voigt 2009; Kirchner 2007; Coase 1998; Williamson 1979) makes it necessary to analyze
rules within a given institutional context. NIE acknowledges that transaction costs,
imperfect information, and bounded rationality influence the rulemaking process
(Homann and Kirchner 1995; Furubotn and Richter 2005) and even optimal solutions to
regulatory problems can become unstable and suboptimal over time. Experimentation
with different rules and observing the results of this experimentation can result in a
learning process that can overcome the shortcomings in the rulemaking process and help
optimize institutional design (Kirchner, Painter and Kaal 2005; Homann and Kirchner
1995; Furubotn and Richter 2005).
Experimentation and rule revision are necessary elements in the learning process
because the requirements for rules and their adaptability to future states only becomes
clear when stable and presumptively optimal rules emerge as suboptimal. Rule revision
occurs after the actors in the rulemaking process acquire information confirming that the
rule is suboptimal. Additional rules are enacted based on the rulemakers’ (often bounded
and limited) understanding of necessary improvements for the then-existing rules.
Anticipation of future developments does not play a role in this learning process.
3
“Holistic or Utopian social engineering, as opposed to piecemeal social engineering, is never of a
‘private’ but always of a ‘public’ character.” (Popper 1957, 67).
6

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
Learning is predominantly seen as learning from mistakes and past experience. Dynamic
elements via a feedback effects are missing.
Rulemaking in a dynamic framework is intended to optimize NIE’s learning
process and address the shortcomings of the rulemaking process via feedback effects in
the respective institutional context. In his theory of lawmaking, Christian Kirchner
describes feedback effects in the context of private actors’ reactions and counter-
activities to institutional constraints (Kirchner 1995). Others have described feedback
effects in the context of actors’ reactions to institutional change (Dethier 1999). Dynamic
elements in the rulemaking process can help shift rulemaking away from stable and
presumptively optimal rules to more sustainable solutions. Opportunities for integrating
dynamic elements into the rulemaking process include: (i) intra-jurisdictional feedback
processes such as (i) exchanges and synergies between public rulemakers and regulators,
(ii) feedback effects between private and public rulemakers, (iii) inter-jurisdictional
feedback processes, (iv) informal rules, and (v) organizational culture.
1. Formal vs. Informal Rules
NIE’s distinction between formal and informal rules is particularly relevant and
useful in the context of dynamic regulation because informal rules can provide dynamic
elements in the rulemaking process. Institutions in the NIE framework are defined as
general formal or informal rules or sets of general rules, together with their enforcement
mechanisms (Furubotn and Richter 2005, Voigt 2009). NIE emphasizes the importance
of informal institutions, such as social norms and custom (Voigt 2009). Informal rules as
part of a dynamic feedback process can provide relevant information for rulemaking.
Parties who are subject to informal rules signal their preferences as well as efficient
solutions to the public rulemaker. Informal rules and practices therefore provide
additional information that can help modify the actions of rulemakers and improve
rulemaking.
Informal rules in the feedback process of dynamic regulation can lead to
rulemaking if they are formalized and enforced. Unenforceable rules are generally
irrelevant for purposes of economic analysis because they do not provide incentives and
sanctions. In the NIE framework, “legal rules without enforcement mechanisms do not
qualify as institutions” (Kirchner 2011, 162). Unlike ordinary private ordering, where the
formalization of existing informal rules and enforcement mechanisms can be a lengthy
process that may not always be finalized, the formalization of informal rules in the
dynamic process may happen sooner and is more likely to succeed and be finalized if the
informal rules provide relevant information for the public rulemaking process. Feedback
effects in dynamic regulation allow public rulemakers to receive a direct benefit from the
formalization of informal rules and the additional information it produces for the public
rulemaking process.
2. Private vs. Public Rulemaking
Christian Kirchner has described the interplay between public and private law in
the evolution of law (Kirchner 2011). The distinction between public and private
rulemaking is relevant and useful in a dynamic framework for rulemaking because the
feedback process in dynamic regulation involves different public rulemakers as well as
private and public rulemakers.
7

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
Private rulemaking refers to rulemaking by private organizations, standard setters,
and private contracting parties. By contrast, public rulemaking generally refers to
rulemaking by the legislative bodies and courts in any given jurisdiction. Public
rulemakers rely on stable and presumptively optimal rules because they lack necessary,
comparable, de-centralized, and institution-specific information.4 Private rulemakers have
a comparative advantage over public rulemakers because public rulemakers do not have
comparable access to timely and institution-specific information. While public
rulemakers are limited as to the information they can obtain to enact rules, private
rulemakers can work with and utilize decentralized information continuously. This
enables private rulemakers to react in a timely fashion to emerging, decentralized, and
institution-specific information.
Dynamic regulation can facilitate the feedback process in which the private
rulemaker interacts with the public rulemaker.5 Because private rulemakers have access
to relevant, de-centralized, and institution-specific information, the feedback process
benefits from the interaction between public rulemakers and private rulemakers. The
feedback process between public and private rulemakers increases the availability,
timeliness, and quality of information available to the public rulemaker. This induces and
supports the learning process for the public rulemaker. The feedback process between
public and private rulemakers therefore enables the public rulemaker to react when the
latest emerging information becomes available. Through this feedback process and
interplay between public and private rulemakers, dynamic regulation can create
incentives for a learning process for the public rulemaker.
The feedback process between different public rulemakers can also improve
public rulemaking. For instances, while the competition between legislators does not
necessarily provide a feedback process in the sense of cooperation, (Kirchner, Painter and
Kaal 2005; Carbonara and Parisi 2008; Kerber 2000; Heine and Kerber 2002), it can
nevertheless provide incentives for public rulemakers to consider regulatory solutions
from other jurisdictions. Because the competition between legislators requires public
rulemakers to meet consumers’ and legal addressees’ quality expectations and
preferences, the competition between legislators adds a dynamic and market-driven
element with a feedback effect to the rulemaking process.
Consumer choice is a dynamic process because public lawmakers in a given
jurisdiction can utilize the decentralized information6 made available when a critical mass
of consumer opt-outs signals that a different rule may be optimal. The consumer opt-out
of existing rules creates a feedback effect for the public rulemaker and triggers a
modification of the public rulemaker’s next action in the rulemaking process. As a result,
public rulemakers have improved access to relevant information, enabling them to
optimize public rulemaking. Because the dynamic element in the competition between
legislators originates predominantly from consumer choice and competition with other
jurisdictions, public rulemakers may be able to optimize their rules by considering
4 Regulators may conduct congressional studies to minimize their informational disadvantage. However,
these studies mostly follow after Congress identified particular concerns in the regulatory structure or in
financial markets. These studies may not provide real-time and relevant information before regulatory
action by public rule-makers is necessary.
5 On the interplay between public and private rulemaking see Kirchner 2011.
6 Decentralized information in this context refers to relevant information from non-native jurisdictional
sources that become an integral part of the rulemaking process.
8

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
dynamic elements in the intra-jurisdictional rulemaking process.
The feedback effects that result from interactions between public rulemakers’
agents also add a dynamic element to regulation. Unlike the feedback effects between
private and public rulemakers, the information exchange between agents of public
rulemakers, such as regulators, will not necessarily involve decentralized information.
Instead, information exchange, cooperation, and synergies between different regulators
facilitate the feedback effects and add dynamic exchanges to improve public rulemaking.
IV. Dynamic Regulation in the Incomplete Contract Model
NIE’s incomplete contract model recognizes that opportunistic behavior,
transaction costs, and bounded rationality (Williamson 1996, Furubotn and Richter 2005)
undermine comprehensive contracting (O’Kelley 2012; Williamson 1991). Because it is
too costly for contracting parties to anticipate all contingencies and to agree to necessary
contract adaptations in advance (Williamson 1985), the contracting parties in the
incomplete contract model do not specify all of their respective obligations under the
contract ex-ante. Parties rely on control rights to minimize opportunistic behavior and
postpone the specification of the exact parameters of their respective duties until they
have accumulated sufficient relevant information to make a decision (Richter 1989).
Several factors can affect the degree of contractual incompleteness. The cost of
contracting and the ability of contracting parties to anticipate opportunistic behavior
determine the degree of contractual incompleteness (Hart 1995). The availability,
timeliness, and quality of information also influence the degree of contractual
incompleteness. This paper suggests that contractual incompleteness can be lowered
through dynamic processes within the rulemaking process in the incomplete contract
model. Through the feedback process, dynamic elements help to improve the availability,
timeliness, and quality of information.
1. Optimizing the Learning Process
NIE’s assumptions of methodological individualism, self-interested behavior,
scarcity of resources, incomplete information, and bounded rationality are consistent with
and support the concept of rulemaking as a learning process (Kirchner 2011). According
to incomplete contract theory, the rulemaking process is a learning process facilitated by
incomplete contracts (Kirchner 2011; Furubotn and Richter 2005). Incomplete contracts
can optimize the rulemaking process (Kirchner 2011; Furubotn and Richter 2005;
Macneil 1974; Hart and Moore 1999; Schanze 1991/1993/2005) and overcome
unintended side-effects and suboptimal rules that result from bounded rationality and
incomplete information (Kirchner 2011; Korobkin and Ulen 2000; Mantzavinos 2001).
The learning process in the incomplete contract model is built into the contract and seen
as a form of experimentation by way of observation (Kirchner 2011). Participants in the
learning process make decisions as part of a search process (Kirchner 2011, 164).
Incomplete contract theory therefore lowers incomplete information by leaving open
provisions that require additional information (Kirchner 2011, 168). Decisions are made
when sufficient information becomes available.
Rulemaking is inexorably tied to the economic, political, and transactional
circumstances at the time of the enactment of the rule. These circumstances will
inevitably change. Even optimal solutions to regulatory problems can become unstable
9

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
and suboptimal over time. Rule revisions and/or additional rulemaking become necessary.
Through the learning process, rulemaking in the incomplete contract model can address
the inefficiencies of trial-and-error rulemaking (Kirchner 2005, 164).7 Rather than
engaging in suboptimal trial-and-error rulemaking under conditions of incomplete
information and bounded rationality, rulemaking in the incomplete contract model is
postponed until rulemakers have sufficient information. Experimentation, observation,
and rule revision evolve into a continuous learning process that is intended to improve the
quality of rulemaking and optimize the resulting institutions and governance structures.
The learning process in incomplete contract theory can be improved.
Experimentation with different rules, rule revision, and additional rulemaking create
significant transaction costs8 and postponing rulemaking until sufficient information is
available may not always be possible or desirable. Financial crises throughout history
(Rheinhart and Rogoff 2011) have demonstrated that rules are mostly enacted, especially
in the context of financial regulation, when it is politically opportune (Coffee 2012), not
when appropriate information for rulemaking is available. A classic collective action
problem controls rulemaking. In the competition to shape rulemaking, smaller and better
organized special interest groups usually dominate latent groups (such as dispersed
investors) (Olson 1965). During and after crises, however, political entrepreneurs assume
the transaction costs of organizing the otherwise disinterested latent groups so as to
temporarily overcome the predominance of special interest groups in the rulemaking
process (Ostrom 1990). The collective action problem and the cyclical nature of
rulemaking (Coffee 2012) are likely to persist, making alternatives and supplements to
existing institutional designs for rulemaking even more relevant. Dynamic regulation can
supplement existing institutional designs for rulemaking, help counteract negative
consequences of cyclical rulemaking, and improve corresponding institutional designs.
Improvements to the learning process in the incomplete contract model would
help facilitate rulemakers’ access to relevant and timely information ex-ante, if and when
it is needed, and before financial crises and political expediency enable and require
rulemaking. Dynamic regulation in the incomplete contract framework improves the
rulemaking process by providing relevant and timely information through a dynamic
feedback process before rulemakers finalize rules. Dynamic regulation via feedback
effects may be seen as part of a search process that facilitates the learning process in the
incomplete contract model (Kirchner 2011). The feedback process in dynamic
regulation increases the availability of relevant information. Contracting parties in the
incomplete contract model only postpone the specification of obligations if the feedback
process in the dynamic framework did not generate sufficient information. Should
sufficient information be available,9 contracting parties do not have to postpone decision-
making, and contractual incompleteness can be lowered.
7 Christian Kirchner describes the rulemaking process in the incomplete contract model as “incomplete
contracts in which specification of obligations of the contracting parties is postponed to a point in time
when they have sufficient information to make the decision.” Ibid.
8 Systemic risk and the economic consequences of financial crises in the past suggest that the cost of rule
revision and experimentation are substantial, especially if the existing rulemaking process does not protect
against systemic shocks and financial crises.
9 The sufficiency of information in this model, if assessed by rulemakers alone, could lead to suboptimal
results. Path dependencies may lead decision-makers to believe they control sufficient information for
rulemaking when they in fact do not. Because the feedback effect is intended to perpetually reinforce itself,
10

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
2. Organizational Culture
Organizational culture can be defined as the mutually-reinforcing behavioral
expectations of the members of an institution (Furubotn and Richter 2005). Under
incomplete contract theory, incomplete information and unforeseen contingencies make
incomplete contracts necessary because it is impossible for contracting parties to foresee
all possible contingencies (Furubotn and Richter 2005). In contrast with general
incomplete contract theory, the literature on organizational culture views unforeseen
contingencies and contractual incompleteness as remediable.10 Kreps points out that
parties may not engage in certain transactions and transactions may be too expensive if
the participants cannot rely on an efficient and equitable adaptation to unforeseen
contingencies (1990, 92). At the same time, parties in the incomplete contract model
cannot adapt to unforeseen contingencies because they cannot specify ex-ante how those
contingencies will be met (Kreps 1990, 93). Kreps’s model suggests that organizational
culture can provide a remedy for dealing with the problem of unforeseen contingencies
and contractual incompleteness. Because of behavioral expectations in the institution,
hierarchical inferiors can anticipate how an organization will react to circumstances as
they arise (Kreps 1990, 126).
By expanding Kreps’s model of organizational culture and applying it to the
rulemaking process, dynamic regulation also takes issue with the broad scope of
contractual incompleteness and delayed decision-making in the incomplete contract
model. Dynamic regulation can supplement and enhance the anticipatory properties of
organizational culture in the context of rulemaking. Behavioral expectations in
organizational culture allow actors to anticipate how an institution will react to changed
circumstances. Similarly, dynamic regulation allows rulemakers in the incomplete
contract model to adapt to unforeseen contingencies through a feedback effect that
improves the availability and quality of information for rulemaking ex-ante. Dynamic
regulation helps rulemakers anticipate how institutions will react to circumstances as they
arise because the feedback process provides decentralized, timely, and institution-specific
information for rulemaking. Rules are adjusted ex-ante in anticipation of future
contingencies. The broad scope for contractual incompleteness and delayed decision-
making as stipulated by the incomplete contract model are necessary only if the feedback
effect did not produce sufficient information for rulemaking. Defining the parameters for
measuring the sufficiency of information in the rulemaking process with and without
dynamic elements is beyond the scope of this paper. Additional research may be needed
in this context.
The literature on organizational culture suggests that overcoming unforeseen
contingencies is possible via a generally applicable and simple principle or focal point
(Kreps 1990, 93). The focal principle of organizational culture can provide some
the availability of information generated through this process cannot be optimized at any given point in
time.
10 “While a particular contingency may be unforeseen, provision for it is not completely impossible.”
(Kreps 1990, 117).
11

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
indication as to when agreements may be broken as a result of unforeseeable
contingencies (Furubotn and Richter 2005, 179):11
[I]t should be feasible to establish some sort of principle or rule
that has both wide applicability and sufficient simplicity to be
interpretable readily by all affected parties” (Furubotn and
Richter 2005, 178).
[The principle] says how things are done, and how they are
meant to be done in the organization. Because it will be
designed through time to meet unforeseen contingencies as they
arise, it will be the product of evolution inside the organization
and will be influenced by the organization’s history […].
(Kreps, 1990, 92-93)
Even though one cannot think through the contingencies, one might be
able to predict what principle will be good at meeting them. Principles are
better or worse depending on how they adapt to the contingencies that do
arise. (Kreps 1990, 128).
Dynamic regulation is a method for improving the availability and quality of
information for rulemaking. The feedback process in dynamic regulation may be viewed
as a focal point or principle for rulemaking. The feedback effect may enable rule makers
to provide for contingencies ex-ante. Dynamic regulation as a focal point or principle
enables rulemakers to adapt to contingencies if and when they arise because the feedback
effect provides relevant, timely, decentralized, and institution-specific information for
rulemaking. The feedback effect in dynamic regulation helps rulemakers adopt rules that
are applicable and adaptable to future states of the world.
Certainty in rulemaking can increase when the rulemaker’s learning process takes
place in the context of dynamic regulation. Dynamic regulation can provide relevant,
decentralized, timely, and institution-specific information via the feedback process ex-
ante before rulemakers finalize rules. Because the information is provided ex-ante via a
feedback process, the certainty for all involved parties is not affected ex-post after rules
became effective. By increasing the availability of information ex-ante, dynamic
regulation lowers unforeseen contingencies in the rulemaking process and helps lower
contractual incompleteness while at the same time maintaining certainty in the
rulemaking process.
Organizational culture facilitates cooperation among equals (Furubotn and Richter
2005, 179)12 and can facilitate successful coordination among different actors (Calvert
1995, 244).13 Furubotn and Richter suggest that this cooperation via organizational
culture takes place predominantly among private actors (Furubotn and Richter 2005, 179).
The feedback effect in dynamic regulation as part of the organizational culture of
11 According to Furubotn and Richter, “the focal point interpretation of corporate culture is able to give
some indication of when an agreement will be broken as a consequence of unforeseeable contingencies”
(2005, 179).
12 Behavioral expectations within institutions may not only enable hierarchical inferiors in hierarchical
organizations to anticipate how an organization will respond under changing conditions (Kreps 1990, 126)
but may also lead to cooperation among equals (Furubotn and Richter 2005, 179).
13 “Recognizing or creating focal points is one important way in which the players can successfully
coordinate” (Calvert 1995, 244).
12

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
rulemaking may allow cooperation and coordination not only among private actors but
also among public rulemakers and between private and public rulemakers.
V. Conclusion
Rulemakers can integrate dynamic elements into the rulemaking process in many
different ways, including (i) intra-jurisdictional feedback processes such as exchanges
and synergies between public rulemakers and regulators or (ii) feedback effects between
private and public rulemakers, (iii) inter-jurisdictional feedback processes, (iv) informal
rules, and (v) organizational culture. Other feedback processes that contribute to the
evolution of law may already exist and/or emerge over time. The combination of these
feedback processes can result in a sequence of mutually-reinforcing, information-
enhancing events. This process can help minimize ex-post trial-and-error experimentation
with stable and presumptively optimal rules after previous stable rules have emerged as
failures. Ex-ante experimentation (before the enactment of rules) becomes the focal point
of rulemaking. The feedback effect improves the availability and quality of information
for rulemaking ex-ante, helping to preempt suboptimal rules. Anticipation of future
contingencies and adaptability to such contingencies become part of the rulemaking
process.
13

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arrow, K. (1994), “Methodological Individualism and Social Knowledge,” American
Economic Review, 84, 1-9.
Auray, S., Mariotti, T., and F. Moizeau (2011), “Dynamic Regulation of Quality,” RAND
Journal of Economics, 42, 246-265.
Baron, D. P., and D. Besanko (1987), “Commitment and Fairness in a Dynamic
Regulatory Relationship,” The Review of Economic Studies, 54, 413-436.
Baron, D. P., and D. Besanko (1984), “Regulation and Information in a Continuing
Relationship,” Information Economics and Policy, 1, 267-302.
Bauer, J. M., and E. Bohlin (2008), “From Static to Dynamic Regulation - Recent
Developments in US Telecommunications Policy,” Intereconomics, 43, 38-50.
Calvert, R. L. (1995), “The Rational Choice Theory of Social Institutions: Cooperation,
Coordination, and Communication,” in: J. S. Banks and E. A. Hnushek (eds.),
Modern Political Economy: Old Topics, New Directions, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, pp. 216-269.
Carbonara, E., and F. Parisi (2008), “Bargaining for Legal Harmonization: Jurisdictional
Competition and Legal Obsolescence,” in: T. Eger and H. Sch fer (eds.),
Internationalisierung des Rechts und Seine Ökonomische Analyse
[Internationalization of the Law and its Economic Analysis], Springer
Fachmedien, Wiesbaden, pp. 339-52.
Coase, R. (1998), “The New Institutional Economics,” American Economic Review, 88,
72-74.
Coffee, J. C., Jr. (2012), “The Political Economy of Dodd-Frank: Why Financial Reform
Tends to be Frustrated and Systemic Risk Perpetuated,” Cornell Law Review, 97,
1019-1082.
Conslik, J. (1996), “Why Bounded Rationality?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 34,
669-700.
De Bijl, P. W. J., and M. Meitz (2004), “Dynamic Regulation and Entry in
Telecommunications Markets: A Policy Framework,” Information Economics
and Policy, 16, 411-437.
Dethier, J. (1999), “Governance and Economic Performance: A Survey,” Discussion
Paper No. 5, Zentrum für Entwicklungsforschung [Center for Development
Research], Universität Bonn, Bonn (Germany).
14

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
Furubotn, E. G., and R. Richter (2005), Institutions and Economic Theory: The
Contribution of the New Institutional Economics, University of Michigan Press,
Ann Arbor.
Haavelmo, T. (1997), “Econometrics and the Welfare State,” American Economic Review,
87, 13-15.
Hart, O. (1995), Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Oxford University Press,
New York.
Hart, O., and J. Moore (1999), “Foundations of Incomplete Contracts,” Review of
Economic Studies, 66, 115-138.
Heine, K., and W. Kerber (2002), “European Corporate Laws, Regulatory Competition
and Path Dependence,” European Journal of Law and Economics, 13, 47-71.
Homann K., and C. Kirchner (1995), “Ordnungsethik,” in: P. Herder-Dornecih, K.-E.
Schenk, and D. Schmidtchen (eds.), Jahrbuch für Neue Politische Ökonomie:
Von der Theorie der Wirtschaftssysteme zur Ökonomischen Systemtheorie,
Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen, pp. 189-211
Kerber, W. (1999), “Interjurisdictional Competition Within the European Union,”
Fordham International Law Journal, 23, 216-249.
Kirchner, C. (2011), “Evolution of Law: Interplay Between Private and Public Rule-
Making: A New Institutional Economics Analysis,” Erasmus Law Review, 4,
161-172.
Kirchner, C. (2008), “The Power of Rational Choice Methodology in Guiding the
Analysis and the Design of Public International Law Institutions,” Illinois Law
Review, 2008, 419-428.
Kirchner, C. (2007), “Public Choice and New Institutional Economics: A Comparative
Analysis in Search of Co-operation Potentials,” Public Economics and Public
Choice, 19, 25–26, 32.
Kirchner, C., Painter, R., and W. Kaal (2005), “Regulatory Competition in EU Corporate
Law after Inspire Art: Unbundling Delaware’s Product for Europe,” European
Company and Financial Law Review, 2, 159-206.
Kirchner, C. (2001), “Rationality Assumption in Law and in Economics. A Reciprocal
Learning Process,” in: F. Haft, H. Hof, and S. Wesche (eds.), Bausteine Zu
Einer Verhaltenstheorie des Rechts, Nomos, Baden-Baden, pp. 445-448.
Kirchner, C. (1995), “Market Organization: A New-Institutional Perspective,” Journal of
Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 151, 260-267.
Kirchner, C. (1994), “New Challenges to the Rationality Assumption,” Journal of
15

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
Institutional and Theoretical Economics, 150, 37-41.
Korobkin, R. B., and T. S. Ulen (2000), “Law and Behavioral Science: Removing the
Rationality Assumption from Law and Economics,” California Law Review, 88,
1051-1144.
Kreps, D. M. (1990), “Corporate Culture and Economic Theory,” in: J. E. Alt and K. A.
Shepsle (eds.), Perspectives on Positive Political Economy, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, pp. 90-143.
Lewis, T. R., and H. Yildirim (2002), “Learning by Doing and Dynamic
Regulation,” RAND Journal of Economics, 33, 22-36.
Litwack, J. M. (1992), Dynamic Regulation, Demand Information and Market Prices,
Stanford University, Stanford.
Macneil, I. R. (1974), “The Many Futures of Contracts,” Southern California Law
Review, 47, 691-816.
Mantzavinos, C. (2001), Individuals, Institutions, and Markets, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Nelson, R. R., and S. G. Winter (1982), An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change,
Belknap Press, Cambridge.
North, D. C. (1990), Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
O'Kelley, C. R. T. (2012), “Knight, and the Nexus-of-Contracts Theory of the Firm: A
Reflection on Reification, Reality, and the Corporation as Entrepreneur
Surrogate,” Seattle University Law Review, 35, 1247-1269.
Olson, M. (1965), The Logic of Collective Action, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Ostrom, E. (1990), Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective
Action, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Popper, K. R. (1957), The Poverty of Historicism, Routledge, London.
Rheinhart, C. M., and K. Rogoff (2009), This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of
Financial Folly, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Richter, R. (1989), “Banking Regulation as Seen by the New Institutional Economics,”
in: E. G. Furubotn and R. Richter (eds.), The Economics and Law of Banking
Regulation, Center for the Study of New Institutional Economics, Occasional
Papers, Vol. 2, Universität des Saarlandes, Saarbrücken, pp. 135–160.
16

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
Richter, R., and E. G. Furubotn (2003), Neue Institutionenökonomik [New Institutional
Economics], Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen.
Schanze, E. (2005), “International Standards: Functions and Links to Law,” in: P. Nobel
(ed.), International Standards and the Law, Staempfli, Berne, pp. 83-103.
Schanze, E. (1993), “Symbiotic Arrangements,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
Economics, 149, 691-697.
Schanze, E. (1991), “Symbiotic Contracts: Exploring Long-Term Agency Structures
between Contract and Corporation,” in: C. Joerges (ed.), Franchising and the
Law: Theoretical and Comparative Approaches in Europe and the United
States, Nomos, Baden-Baden, pp. 67-104.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1987), Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung: Eine Untersuchung
über Unternehmergewinn, Kapital, Kredit, Zins und den Konjunkturzyklus,
Duncker & Humblot, Berlin.
Selten, R. (1990), “Bounded Rationality,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
Economics, 146, 649-658.
Simon, H. A. (1951), Models of Man, Wiley, New York.
Simon, H. A. (1982), Models of Bounded Rationality: Empirically Grounded Economic
Reason, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
Van Dijk, M., and M. Mulder (2005), “Regulation of Telecommunication and
Deployment of Broadband,” Paper No. 131, CPB Netherlands Bureau for
Economic Policy Analysis, Hague.
Voigt, S. (2002), Institutionenökonomik [Institutional Economics], Fink, Paderborn.
Von Hayek, F. A. (1968), Der Wettbewerb als Entdeckungsverfahren, University of Kiel,
Kiel.
Williamson, O. E. (1991), “Comparative Economic Organization: The Analysis of
Discrete Structural Alternatives,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 36, 269-
296.
Williamson, O. E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, Free Press, New
York.
Williamson, O. E. (1996), The Mechanisms of Governance, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
17

DYNAMIC REGULATION IN A NEW INSTITUTIONAL ECONOMICS FRAMEWORK
Williamson, O. E. (1979), “Transaction-Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
Relations,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 22, 233-261.
18

