REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
–
How Decentralized Autonomous Organizations Address
Shortcomings in the Venture Capital Market
Wulf Kaal1
Abstract-
Venture capital (VC) models can be optimized with emerging
decentralized technology. After discussing the shortcomings of the
existing VC market and the rise of alternative early round funding
mechanisms, the paper highlights the evolution of VC businesses
that are operated by a Decentralized Autonomous Organization
(DAO).
Key Words: Venture Capital, Decentralized Autonomous
Organization, Reputation, Decentralized Governance, Capital,
Venture Funding, Finance, Token Models, Cryptocurrencies,
Feedback Effects, Emerging Technology, Tokens, Blockchain,
Distributed Ledger Technology
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O3
1 Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law, Minneapolis. The
author is grateful for many discussions with Craig Calcaterra on the uses of
reputation systems. They author is grateful for outstanding research assistance
from Hayley Howe and research librarian Elizabeth Hadden-Peck.
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 2
II. SHORTCOMINGS OF THE EXISTING VC MODEL ...................................... 3
1. Fiat VC Market ................................................................................ 3
a) Liquidity - Capital Calls and Raising Capital ............................................. 4
b) Downsides of Syndication ....................................................................... 5
c) Cost of Deal Screening and Structuring .................................................. 7
2. Digital Asset VC Market .................................................................. 9
III. ALTERNATIVE EARLY ROUND FUNDING MECHANISMS .................. 10
IV. REPUTATION AS CAPITAL ............................................................... 13
V. MODEL EVOLUTION ............................................................................ 15
1. Basic Model ................................................................................... 15
2. Hybrid VC Model with Traditional Legal Structure ...................... 17
3. Hybrid VC Model with Smart Contracting .................................... 18
4. Incentive Optimized Reputation Model with Smart Contracts ....... 20
VI. CONCLUSION ..................................................................................... 24
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
I. Introduction
Financing options available to technology entrepreneurs are
increasing. The hitherto almost exclusive focus on the access to
venture capital (VC) investing firms is slowly eroded through a
broadening spectrum of funding opportunities for technology
startups. The spectrum of funding opportunities has expanded with
the proliferation of independent business angels (BAs), business
angel networks (BANs), crowdfunding platforms, initial coin
offerings (ICOs), and initial decentralized exchange offerings
(IDO), among others. These emerging and expanding decentralized
funding opportunities are increasingly utilized, especially in the
Silicon Valley tech startup industry.
Digital assets startups that grow rapidly into billion-dollar
businesses with little or no VC funding have demonstrated that the
traditional venture capital model alone was not enough to meet the
funding needs of technology startups. As one case on point, in the
late 2010s, Silicon Valley VC firm Andreesen Horowitz recently
renounced its SEC VC classification and exemptions in favor of
registering as an investment advisor company.2 This move was
motivated largely by a desire to give Andreesen Horowitz enhanced
flexibility in investing in blockchain oriented financing strategies
among other newer, riskier, and more unconventional capital
investment methods with higher payout opportunities. Other VC
firms have joined Andreesen Horowitz in moving away from
conventional VC endeavors towards a more modern startup
investment approach tailored to the emerging blockchain and
crowdfunding technologies of the 21st century.
2 Alex Konrad, Andreesen Horowitz is Blowing Up the Venture Capital Model
(Again), FORBES MAG., (Apr. 30, 2019),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/alexkonrad/2019/04/02/andreessen-horowitz-is-
blowing-up-the-venture-capital-model-again/#34e901a57d9f.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

The current state of the VC market is trending towards a
combination in the types of fundraising, starting with ICO and
crowdfunding platforms to raise an initial round of capital, generate
interest and publicity for the startup, and act as a litmus test for
pitching the startup to BAs and VCs once there has been some
success with the early rounds. Nevertheless, despite all the success
stories, there is a low rate of investor success with all four varieties
of capital investment.3
This article shows that decentralized reputation governance models
in venture capital have the potential to upgrade the venture capital
market. After discussing the shortcomings of the legacy VC market
and emerging models for early round funding of digital assets
startups, the paper evaluates reputation as capital as another
alternative of the early round funding methods. The paper highlights
the model evolution of reputation as capital models.
II. Shortcomings of the Existing VC Model
The existing VC model is subject to significant ongoing downsides
that inhibits its ability to provide long-term value to the tech startup
community. The existing market for fiat VC investments is subject
to several significant downsides, especially in comparison with the
market for early round digital asset investments.
1. Fiat VC Market
3 See id. See also Armin Schwienbacher, Equity Crowdfunding: Anything to
Celebrate?, 21 VENTURE CAP.: INT’L J. ENTREPRENEURIAL FIN. (20TH
ANNIVERSARY ISSUE) 1, at 65 (2019); STEFANO BONINI, VINCENZO CAPIZZI &
PAOLA ZOCCHI, The Role of Angel Syndicates on the Demand and Supply of
Informal Venture Capital, in NEW FRONTIERS IN ENTREPRENEURIAL FINANCE
RESEARCH 13-49 (Anita Quas et al. ed., 2019) [hereinafter Bonini, The Role of
Angel Syndicates].
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
a) Liquidity - Capital Calls and Raising Capital
One of the biggest problems in the traditional VC ecosystem is lack
of liquidity.4 The traditional VC model disincentivizes generating
early profits.5 Capital is “locked in” or “locked up” for an extended
period of time. Once an investment is made, its success is highly
dependent on a small group of managers and/or entrepreneurs.6
Investing in innovative technology requires substantial time to
generate returns - at least seven years - and requires even longer to
generate a profitable exit (usually via an IPO or M&A transaction).7
VC firms collect capital from Limited Partner investors for a period
of 8-12 years.8 Venture capitalists invest with a view towards
capital gain on exit and overall liquidity.9 In order to maximize
liquidity, the most preferred routes are the most profitable exit
routes.10 Moreover, VC investing is high-risk and VC are subject to
regulation that negatively impacts liquidity.11 Because of these
liquidity downsides, companies are increasingly moving toward a
“staying private” strategy by decreasing venture-backed exits.12
4 Brian Patrick Eha, Why This Venture Capitalist Wants to Make Traditional VC
Obsolete, AM. BANKER (Apr. 3, 2017),
https://www.americanbanker.com/news/why-this-venture-capitalist-wants-to-
make-traditional-vc-obsolete.
5 Infor. Memorandum (VNX Exch.), Jul. 2019, at 5 [hereinafter VNX Exch.].
6 Vance H. Fried & Robert D. Hisrich, Toward a Model of Venture Capital
Investment Decision Making, 23 FIN. MGMT. 3, 28-37 (1994).
7 VNX Exch., supra note 5, at 4.
8 VNX Exch., supra note 5, at 4.
9 Douglas Cumming & Sofia Johan, Is Venture Capital in Crisis?, WORLD
ECONOMIC REV. (Jul. 16, 2012), https://worldfinancialreview.com/venture-
capital-crisis.
10 Id. at 3.
11 Bob Remeika, Arisa Amano & David Sacks, The Regulated Token (R-Token)
Standard, HARBOR PLATFORM, INC. (Feb. 6, 2018) at 1. For discussion of
regulatory initiatives aimed to facilitate VC fundraising, see Mark Fenwick &
Erik P.M. Vermeulen, How to “Fix” the Venture Capital Model? Regulation
versus Disruption (Lex Research Topics in Corporate Law & Economics
Working Paper, Paper no. 2019-5 Aug. 2019),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3449075.
12 VNX Exch., supra note 5, at 5.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

Early-stage funding fell from thirty-five to twenty seven percent of
total VC funding as VCs increasingly focus on funding later-stage
companies.13
The existing market for fiat VC requires the fiat VC funds to support
capital calls with liquidity. In other words, VCs cannot deploy all
the capital they raised in order to attain higher returns as they may
be subject to capital calls that need to be funded. Because of their
ability to maintain liquidity to support capital calls from their
investors, traditional fiat VC funds are limited in their ability to
deploy capital. Similar to insurance companies that are required to
maintain certain cash reserves to fund possible policy payouts,
traditional fiat VC funds need to maintain assets to fund future
liabilities which affects their return on investment and overall fund
performance.
Traditional fiat VCs are also required to spend significant amount
of their time raising capital from limited partners. This time
commitment to raising capital often distracts VCs from their main
investing responsibilities as they are forced to spend more time with
potential limited partners and their needs rather than dealing with
due diligence on potential new and / or existing portfolio
companies. In other words, time spent on limited partners and their
needs is time taken away from portfolio company due diligence and
efforts to make such portfolio companies successful. Because of this
dynamic, the current VC model tends to reflect the networking and
public relations ability of the VC’s general partner instead of their
capital allocation ability.
b) Downsides of Syndication
The VC industry started small14 so in order to diversify risk while
maximizing return, firms syndicated their investments with other
13 VNX Exch., supra note 5, at 6.
14 Garry D. Bruton, Vance H. Fried, & Sophie Manigart, Institutional Influences
on the Worldwide Expansion of Venture Capital, 29 ENTREPRENEURSHIP
THEORY AND PRAC. 6, 737 (2005).
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
firms.15 Even as firm size grew and the need to syndicate in order
to diversify risk declined, firms continued to syndicate in order to
share resources including knowledge, legitimacy, and deal flow.16
Trust is central to the success of syndication.17
Syndication in traditional VC investment can be efficient and create
economies of scale because VCs serve as an information-producing
agent and decision-making agent for the investor.18 VCs actively
search for prospects via their informal network, conference
attendance, and executive search agencies in an identified market.19
Even in 1994, a VC had lower information-gathering costs through
economies of scale, scope, and a learning curve.20 The role of an
intermediary is valuable, but in 1994, VC funds traditionally paid a
management fee of 2.5% of assets per year, as well as 20% of any
profits.21 A field study found firms from three US regions shared
the same “dominant logic” or sets of beliefs about how VC firms
and their portfolio companies should behave.22 This is unsurprising
because professional standards with a strong normative set of
beliefs for industry practice are set by a centralized entity - The
15 Bruton, supra note 14, at 739 (citing M.L. Reiner, The transformation of
venture capital: a history of venture capital organizations in the United States,
(1989) (Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Berkeley) (ProQuest)).
16 Bruton, supra note 14, at 739 (citing Olav Sorenson & Toby Stuart,
Syndication Networks and the Spatial Distribution of Venture Capital
investments, 106 AM. J. SOCIO. 6, at 1546 (2001)).
17 Bruton, supra note 14, at 739 (citing Sorenson, supra note 16).
18 Fried, supra note 6, at 36. For discussion on agency theory and VC, see Paul
A. Gompers, Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
Capital, 50 J. FIN. 5, 1461, 1463-67 (1995).
19 Tyzoon T. Tyebjee & Albert V. Bruno, A Model of Venture Capitalist
Investment Activity, 30 MGMT. SCI. 9, 1051, 1055-1056 (Sep. 1984).
20 Fried, supra note 6, at 35-36
21 Fried, supra note 6, at 36.
22 Bruton, supra note 14, at 739 (citing Fried and Hisrich, The Venture
Capitalist: a Relationship Investor, 37 CAL. MGMT. REV. 2, 101 (1995)).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

National Venture Capital Association. Its membership is strictly
voluntary with expensive membership fees.
Yet, syndication and deal organization is time consuming and
expensive for traditional VCs. Deal organization refers to the
processes by which deals enter into consideration as investment
prospects.23 Intermediaries play an important role in finding VC
prospects24 because the typical investment prospect is too small a
company to be readily identifiable as a potential candidate.25
Intermediation drives up cost. Referrals are made through
syndication, prior investees and personal acquaintances, banks, and
investment brokers. These referrals are more likely to pass through
the first screen because the capitalist has confidence in the referrer’s
judgment and the referrer is more likely to understand what type of
investments may appeal to the capitalist.26 Syndication is a referral
within the VC community where the referrer is the lead investor
seeking participation of other VC funds.27
c) Cost of Deal Screening and Structuring
Deal screening is a significant cost factor for traditional VC firms.
Firms with small staffs screen a relatively large number of potential
available deals.28 Investments are typically limited to areas with
which the VC is familiar, particularly in terms of the technology,
product and market scope of the venture.29 Initial screening is based
on criteria of 1) investment size and policy of the fund; 2) venture
23 Tyebjee, supra note 19.
24 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1052.
25 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1052.
26 Fried, supra note 6, at 32.
27 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1056. For in-depth discussion on syndication, see
Joshua Lerner, The Syndication of Venture Capital Investments, 23 FIN. MGMT.
3, 16 (1994).
28 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1052.
29 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1052-53.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
technology and market sector; 3) venture geographic location; and
4) financing stage.30
Deal evaluation and risk assessment in traditional VC is fraught
with inaccuracies and suboptimal incentives. VCs weigh several
characteristics to assess the perceived risk and expected return of a
prospective venture in deciding whether or not to invest.31 VCs
subjectively assess the prospect’s business plan because the
majority of ventures in search of capital have little, if any, operating
history.32 The analysis is multi-dimensional33, in the areas of 1)
market attractiveness, 2) product differentiation, 3) managerial
capabilities, 4) environmental threat resistance, and 5) cash-out
potential.34 A potential drawback of this process is that perceptual,
emotional, and cognitive processes impact the decision in addition
to financial decisions because the evaluation criteria is made
through subjective human decision-making.35 Additionally, none of
those criteria reflect how a prospective deal may correlate with one
already in the capitalist’s investment portfolio.36
Finally, significant information asymmetries can lead managers to
engage in opportunistic behavior after an investment is made.37
Venture capitalists are not involved in day-to-day operations of the
venture, but they can intervene in the case of financial or managerial
crisis, and because capitalists typically want to cash-out their gains
five to ten years after initial investments, they play an active role in
directing the company towards a merger, acquisition, or public
30 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1056-57. For discussion of financing stage, see
Paul A. Gompers, Optimal Investment, Monitoring, and the Staging of Venture
Vapital, 50 J. FIN. 5, 1461, 1475-84 (1995).
31 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1051.
32 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1053.
33 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1053.
34 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1051, 1053-54.
35 Fried, supra note 6, at 29.
36 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1053.
37 Fried, supra note 6, at 28.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

offering.38 This can have significant downsides for the portfolio
companies and their products.
2. Digital Asset VC Market
Traditional VCs experience often significant problems in entering
the market for digital assets or maintaining their momentum in the
market. Several factors help explain their struggles. Among those
are the significant volatility of the digital asset market and lacking
expertise of traditional VCs in the digital asset market which is still
dominated by several key specialized players. Moreover, traditional
VCs often cannot effectively compete with the ever-increasing
array of decentralized token offering avenues.
Traditional VCs are often also not able to effectively invest in the
digital asset market because they need to defend their investment
choices to their own investors. Because of that, traditional VCs are
often reluctant to invest in digital asset startups with little history or
sales records. Digital asset startups often increase the level of due
diligence for VCs because digital asset startups typically have less
trackable information on product and performance.39 At the same
time, successful digital asset startups provide a significant upside
for VC investors. As a result, some traditional VCs create a digital
asset arm or specialize entirely.
38 Tyebjee, supra note 19, at 1054. For discussion on VC firms taking
companies public, see Paul A. Gompers, Grandstanding in the Venture Capital
Industry, 42 J. FIN. ECONOMICS 133, 133-156 (1996).
39 Stefano Bonini & Vincenzo Capizzi, The Role of Venture Capital in the
Emerging Entrepreneurial Finance Ecosystem: Future Threats and
Opportunities, 21 VENTURE CAP.: INT’L J. ENTREPRENEURIAL FIN. 2-3, 137-
175 (2019) [hereinafter Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital]; Jonas Löher, The
Interaction of Equity Crowdfunding Platforms and Ventures: An Analysis of the
Preselection Process, 19 VENTURE CAP.: INT’L J. ENTREPRENEURIAL FIN. 1-2;
Lars Hornuf, Matthias Schmitt & Eliza Stenzhorn, Equity Crowdfunding in
Germany and the United Kingdom: Follow-up Funding and Firm Failure, 26
CORP. GOVERNANCE: INT’L REV. (SPECIAL ISSUE) 5, 331-354 (2018), Konrad,
supra note 2.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
III. Alternative Early Round Funding Mechanisms
Alternative early round funding mechanisms fill an important gap
in the funding options available to tech entrepreneurs. VC are
typically looking for the next Facebook. However, the lack of a
company track record makes investing in such companies informed
speculation at best.40 As a rule of thumb in the early investment
rounds, the lower the information asymmetry, the lower the payout.
Below a certain threshold of established value, VCs will rarely
invest. In order for tech entrepreneurs to reach that threshold,
alternative early round funding options BAs, BANs, ICOs, IDOs,
and crowdfunding platforms are becoming increasingly
important.41 These alternative funding methods are important to get
entrepreneurs over the VC investment threshold, or to help
entrepreneurs completely bypass of the VC model.42
At its peak in the 2019 cycle, the volume of ICOs has surpassed
VCs and BAs as a fundraising method for startups.43 BAs are
particularly attractive to tech startups in comparison with the VC
market44 and VCs are increasingly taking a backseat to newer forms
of early round startup funding.
Tech entrepreneurs are increasingly drawn towards the less formal
relationships that are typically cultivated between alternative early
round funding methods and tech entrepreneurs. Whereas strict
contractually-focused relationships with VCs are focused primarily
on a data driven approach that emphasizes financial returns, putting
less emphasis on helping with the growth of the startup, alternative
early round funding mechanism often develop a more personal
40 Konrad, supra note 2.
41 Lin Lin & Dominika Nestarcova, Venture Capital in the Rise of Crypto
Economy: Problems and Prospects, 16 BERKELEY BUS. L. J. 2, 533 (2019).
42 Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 3.
43 Lin, supra note 41.
44 Bonini, The Role of Angel Syndicates, supra note 3; Löher, supra note 39.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

mentor-mentee relationship with the entrepreneur. Such alternative
early round funding mechanism often provide effective advice and
assistance in formulating a business plan and marketing the startup
company.45 This soft monitoring approach is increasingly favored
over the hard monitoring conducted by VCs.46 Key for the success
of the relationship-based approach of alternative funding
mechanisms is often the establishment of an effective developer
team that can help the technology come to fruition.
Key distinguishing features often favor alternative early round
funding mechanisms over traditional VC investments. Information
asymmetries increase in traditional VC investment rounds as
startups are incentivized to self-censor when engaging with VCs, as
they have little data to work with, and are reluctant to overexpose
themselves to prospective investors.47 By contrast, the soft
monitoring approach of alternative early round funding
mechanisms tends towards a nurturing, mentoring role which not
only encourages forthrightness, but actually coaches these startups
on how to present themselves to other investors in further
fundraising rounds, and how to market the company to the public.
Traditional VC fee-based compensation mechanism are often less
competitive than the compensation structures used by alternative
early round funding mechanisms. The typical VC fee-based
compensation structure can lead to serious shortcomings, including
excessive fundraising, suboptimal investments, misevaluation, and
overfunding of the portfolio companies during a fund’s holding
period. Technologically sophisticated tech entrepreneurs often
prefer alternative early round funding mechanisms in the first
financing round, whereas VCs are more capable of longer-term
value enhancement.48 Because of this dynamic, tech entrepreneurs
are required to engage in a daunting balancing act alternative early
45 Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 39.
46 Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 39.
47 Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 39.
48 Löher, supra note 39.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
round funding mechanisms and VCs, and in deliberating between
the soft monitoring benefits provided by alternative early round
funding mechanisms and the value-add benefits of VCs.
Alternative early round funding mechanisms are not necessarily
more successful than VCs in early round tech investing. Whereas
alternative early round funding mechanisms often tend to act out of
intuition and personal experience, VC typically use a primarily data
driven approach to investment decisions and portfolio company
evaluation and supervision. Tech entrepreneurs who work with
alternative early round funding mechanisms are subject to external
factors affecting such early round investors individually, including
liquidity problems, eccentricity, personality issues, and differing
visions for management of the company’s present and future. These
shortcomings can contribute to the success but also to the downfall
of alternative early round funding mechanisms.49
The evidence on the success and failure rate of alternative early
round funding mechanisms is mixed. These trends are continuously
evolving. Especially the analysis of crowdfunding and ICOs, among
other alternative early round funding mechanisms, is ambiguous at
best as little is known about the investors themselves in these
contexts.50 The evidence suggests that startups are generally not
relying on VCs for capital until later rounds of fundraising, and use
alternative early round funding mechanisms for the earlier rounds.51
Overall, the volume tech startup relationships with alternative early
round funding mechanisms has grown to match that of VC-startup
relationships.52 While alternative early round funding mechanisms
49 See Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 39 (analyzing data on
Italian, German, UK and US VC markets); Bonini, The Role of Angel
Syndicates, supra note 3; Löher, supra note 39; Konrad, supra note 2; Lin,
supra note 41.
50 Löher, supra note 39; Schwienbacher, supra note 3.
51 Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 39; Konrad, supra note 2;
Lin, supra note 41.
52 Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 39.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

are increasingly used by tech startups in early rounds,53 these
methods frequently fail to provide adequate funding to fully launch
a new company. A significant number of tech startups that rely
exclusively on these methods fail.54
IV. Reputation as Capital
The concept of “Reputation as Capital” introduces another early
round funding alternative. The concept introduces several
optimization metrics compared with other early round funding
alternatives.
The novelty of “Reputation as Capital” lies in the decentralized and
democratized capital allocation functionality enabled by the DAO
design. The DAO proposed herein consists of a group of VCs, who
roughly correspond to the general partners or shareholders of a
venture firm. These VCs each hold a predefined number of
reputation tokens in the DAO which allows them to stake their
reputation on certain deal/investments that are listed on the non-
custodial deal platform of the DAO. The VC’s proportional
holdings of these reputation tokens is likely to increase over time if
the VC follows sound and successful practices by way of staking
the VC’s reputation tokens on investment proposals and succeeding
in the selection of portfolio companies together with other VCs who
also stake their reputation tokens for or against a given investment
proposal.
Reputation tokens serve multiple purposes in the VC investment
process. It is important to note that the reputation tokens are
separate and distinct from the fiat currency or other fungible tokens
that may be used to pay for investments in portfolio companies.
53 Lin, supra note 41; Bonini, The Role of Venture Capital, supra note 39;
Hornuf, supra note 39; Schwienbacher, supra note 3.
54 Schwienbacher, supra note 3; Konrad, supra note 2.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
First and foremost, only reputation token holders are allowed to
participate in the portfolio selection process which materializes by
way of reputation staking on investment proposals.
Second, reputation tokens serve as claims on the future cash flows
generated by the DAO. The cashflows in the form of fungible
cryptocurrencies are paid in proportion to each DAO members’
non-fungible reputation token holding. More specifically, the
returns on investments (ROI) collected by the DAO are distributed
among the reputation token holders in proportion to their reputation
token holdings. The ROI functions as a reputation salary that gets
paid in proportion to each VC’s reputation token holdings. It is
important to note that ROI is only partially considered the revenue
of the individual VCs who committed capital. Rather, the ROI is
treated as DAO revenue that gets partially shared pro-rata based on
investment amounts committed by each VC and partially shared as
a reputation salary which is shared among the DAO’s VC
participants. Accordingly, the value of the reputation tokens is a
function of the ROI of the DAO.
Furthermore, VCs who support investment proposals by staking
their reputation tokens are rewarded with a certain number of newly
minted reputation tokens as salaries, based on a predetermined
formula. Accordingly, the total number of tokens grows over time.
The “Reputation as Capital” model emphasize the GP's reputation
in capital allocation which would over time free the GP's from
having to commit actual capital if they stake their reputation. If VC
reputation is truly meaningful, whales can commit/stake reputation
to fund a project that is then not actually funded with capital by the
whale but rather by the market / LPs. If whales stake but the market
commits for their stake with capital, whales should still have the
right to receive (part of) the ROI because it is their reputation that
is at stake. Whales are not required to commit capital and don't have
to support capital calls with liquidity. Networking and PR would
take place at the beginning of the Fund through the Founders - e.g.
"ride with the whales" but as whale reputation solidifies, they no
longer have to commit capital to deals they staked reputation for.
The system with the best incentive alignment and therefore with the
most long-term likelihood of success emphasizes the reputation of
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

its members as a means of capital allocation in a fair and equitable
way.
V. Model Evolution
Calcaterra, Kaal, and Rao modelled the replacement of capital in
the context of underwriting.55 Reputation as Venture Capital is
different and has to be distinguished from the reputation as capital
replacement that is enabled in the Calcaterra et al. model. Unlike
decentralized underwriting where capital is only needed when a file
is claimed, and premia from the underwriting contracts can continue
to fund those who stake reputation on an underwriting engagement
in lieu of capital, reputation in venture capital needs to fill the role
of capital for each funded venture deal.
In the decentralized underwriting model premia are paid by
customers on the underwritten insurance policies fund the
reputation staked on to underwrite policies. The market only
replaces reputation as capital if and when a reputation underwriter
decides not to stake or to otherwise sell the reputation to the open
market. In that case, the market will jump at the opportunity to
replace a reputation holder in the underwriting DAO because
market participants are looking to participate in the flow of premia
that are used as reputation salaries. By contrast, in the reputation as
venture capital model, the reputation is funded over time by the
market for each venture deal for which venture capital funds are
staking reputation tokens in addition to capital to fund the respective
deal.
1. Basic Model
55 Craig Calcaterra, Wulf A. Kaal, & Vadhindran K. Rao, Decentralized
Underwriting (May 30, 2019),
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3396542.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
ROI Portfolio companies ROI
Mints ROI into
Fungible reputation
Salary token
% Pro $/BTC $/BTC
Rata
SC
LP / Market
Reputation
Reputation Staking
Salary Token
1
3 2
GP
$ Mint RNFT Reputation
Score
Pro Rata to GP RNFT Score
VC DAO
GP
Over time 1. falls away, 2. feeds into 3. as LPs coinvest with GP reputation staked on proposed deals
Figure 1. The incentive compatible model.
This model in Figure 1 illustrates the signaling function a well-
functioning VC DAO can provide for the digital asset investment
market. Here, the VC DAO GP fully transparently allocates pooled
assets to digital asset portfolio companies. The only LP
participation is taking place by following directly the GP
investments. The VC DAO GP does not benefit from those LP
investments directly.
Importantly, the model in Figure 1 does not rely on reputation
staking exclusively. Rather, the VC DAO GP invests both fungible
cryptocurrency from a pool as well as non-fungible and minted
reputation on the portfolio companies. This duality does not allow
for the full benefits that are generated if non-fungible reputation is
staked alone on the deals.
Figure 1, however, illustrates the early phases of a VC DAO GP that
uses reputation as capital as in this model the ROI is already paid
out in proportion to the reputation scores of each VC DAO GP.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

2. Hybrid VC Model with Traditional Legal Structure
ROI Portfolio companies ROI
% Pro $/BTC $/BTC
Rata 20%
SC
LP/Market
Reputation
ReputationStaking
Salary Token
1
3 2
GP
$ Mint RNFT Reputation
Score
Pro Rata to GP RNFT Score
VC DAO
GP
80% Pro Rata
Over time 1. falls away, 2. feeds into 3. as LPs coinvest with GP reputation staked on proposed deals
Figure 2. The hybrid model of a VC DAO.
For many economic and business reasons and because of significant
path dependencies in the capital formation and capital allocation
process with existing venture capital models, the above illustrated
ideal-typical reputation-based capital allocation model in Figure 1
is less likely to be created in the short term. Perhaps after a longer
experimentation period with some of the hybrid models discussed
below, the ideal-typical reputation-based capital allocation model
will become more widely considered. Ultimately, all the models
discussed in this article contribute to the much-needed
experimentation with venture capital reputation models.
The below summary provides an overview of a hybrid model in
Figure 2 that enables a traditional ROI for 80% of capital committed
on a pro rata basis but also allows the use of reputation staking and
staking rewards as salaries which is financed with 20% of the
returns on capital committed. 80% of returns are allocated to
investors pro rata as ROI. 20% of returns are allocated to the
reputation salary pool.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
GP Whales get reputation tokens allocated pro rata to their capital
commitments. Founders get 2% of AUM annually as service fee via
separate contract. Founders also get % of reputation. GP whales
initially fund projects and build reputation. Founders marketing
revolves around a “ride with whales” mantra. LPs do not get
reputation tokens but instead receive fungible investment tokens in
the Fund.
Investment tokens are the fungible instantiation of the reputation
gains of the whales. As a track record forms, whales no longer have
to stake capital for projects to which they stake reputation. LPs can
bid for the right to commit capital for a project the whales upvoted
via reputation stakes. Whales still participate in the success of each
upvoted project through 20% of Fund’s returns allocation to the
reputation salary pool, which gets paid out proportional to each
whale’s reputation score.
Whales who proposed projects that were upvoted by the validation
pool receive a bump up in their reputation. This process follows a
process of decentralized governance.56 Through the decentralized
governance precedent system, projects that were upvoted by the
Whale validation pool and have the highest comparative ROI get
more citations in the reputation system and continually enhance the
reputation of the whale who sourced and proposed it.
3. Hybrid VC Model with Smart Contracting
56 Craig Calcaterra, Wulf A. Kaal, & Vadhindran K. Rao, Blockchain
Infrastructure for Measuring Domain Specific Reputation in Autonomous
Decentralized and Anonymous Systems, Univ. St. Thomas (Minn.) Legal Stud.
Rsch. Paper Series No. 18-11,
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3125822.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

Portfolio companies
Market ROI
Reputation
Salary Token
SPF Platform
VC DAO
RNFT
Staking on
Deals
VC Funds
each individually
Figure 3. Sample legal structure with smart contracts
Figure 3 shows the sample legal structure with smart contracts.
Here, 20% ROI will be charged to the market for co-investing with
the VCs (as the usual 2/20 deal) and then fund the reputation salaries
for the VC. Hence, in the model in Figure 3 VCs will fund their
reputation salaries mostly through the public market.
In order to interact with the real world, the VC DAO needs a legal
wrapper. Otherwise, everyone involved in the DAO may be jointly
and severally liable in any jurisdiction. In the case of a VC DAO
incorporated as a Swiss Association, the assembly (of members of
the Swiss Association) would consist of all the VC Funds that get
upvoted as members (by the existing members following
decentralized governance) after contributing Capital. RNFT is
minted and allocated to VCs in proportion to the DAI contributed
by each VC. The Delegate Association Member (DAM) represents
the VC DAO members in the Association and to the Association’s
board. The Association’s board acts as the agent of the VC DAO in
the real world.
19
Mint
RNFT
$/DAI
20% of Profits 80% of
monthly profits
with monthly HWM Pro
Rata
to DAI
Internal and external relationships of the SPF coordinated via SC. VCs can either only: 1. DAI invest, or 2.RNFT stake –or both 1.+ 2.
Over time 1. falls away (if desired by VC), 2. feeds into 3. as market(co)invests based on VC’s RNFT Staking on Deals
IAD K1
Investment Token
Pool
(C o o n )- i V n C ve ’s s t R b N a F s T e d Mints to
$/DAI
Staking on Deals
3 DAI
Investment Token 3
80% of profits
monthly Pro Rata
to DAI pro
rata
to
VC’s
de RNFT
als score
1 2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
The problem with this model is that VCs are incentivized partially
to fund and stake only on the best deals and stake on the less optimal
deals that are mostly funded by the market. This undermines their
long-term reputation accumulation as some VCs may play favors
and sacrifice their reputation to gain more on the investment side. It
is possible to mitigate these incentives that undermine the long-term
success of the system. For example, it is conceivable that staking on
deals by VCs mandates capital commitments to the deals but that
VCs can over time lower their capital commitments and increase
their staking.
4. Incentive Optimized Reputation Model with Smart
Contracts
A better system would avoid this scenario by emphasizing the
reputation in the system by prohibiting capital investment into
portfolio companies after an initial minting of reputation in
proportion to incoming capital. For purposes of this minting ratio,
and for the optimal incentivization thereafter, it would be preferable
to keep the minting of reputation tokens equally proportional to
incoming capital. In other words, in order to start every incoming
venture capital fund with the same reputation capital, all incoming
capital would preferably the same pro rata.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

Token Opportunity
ROP Market
Crowd/decentralized
analyst/Investment club
non custodial
RNFT Staking on Deals
Purchasers
Figure 4. Non-Custodial DAO Investment Club Model with Smart
Contracts
Figure 4 illustrates the early stages of a non-custodial DAO
Investment Club model (DAOIC) with smart contracts. In this
model, all of the ROP is minted into fungible reputation tokens that
get paid as reputation salaries following decentralized governance.
This model provides the best incentive alignment for DAOIC
members with the highest potential return for all involved.
Every original member of the DAOIC starts with the same capital
commitment that gets minted into RNFT. Future members may be
onboarded with deal proposals by way of the existing DAOIC
member vote following decentralized governance. Newly
onboarded DAOIC members start with the same capital
commitment as the original members and the corresponding RNFT
score.
Because the public co-purchases with the DAOIC members and
expects to pay a price for the right to benefit from the collective
wisdom of the DAOIC members and the deal pipeline they can
together generate, the public should expect to pay the usual 2/20
fees. Accordingly, the DAOIC members get paid 100% of their
21
Mint
RNFT
DAI
100% ROP
+
20% Market ROP
Internal and external relationships of the SPF coordinated via SC. In Phase 3 Purchaser can either only: 1. DAI invest, or 2.RNFT stake –or both 1.+ 2.
Over time 1. falls away (if desired by purchaser), 2. feeds into 3. as market (co)purchases based on RNFT Staking on Deals
IAD SC Acc
Algo Oracle –unless DAI, e.g. ETH in with price oracle
That is used to calc ROP, then distributes
100% ROP plus 20% market ROP and mints
fungible reputation tokens
which are distributed via MVPR
Fungible Reputation
Token
b
(C
as
o
e
)-
d
p
o
u
n
rc
R
h
N
as
F
e
T
Mints to
DAI
Staking on Deals
3 DAI
DAI 3
80% of profits
monthly Pro Rata
to DAI
Service fee 6%?
-coordination deals
- SC coordination de pro als rata to
1 2 RNFT
score
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
respective ROP from their capital commitment plus 20% ROP from
the public’s capital commitment on the respective deal.
Depending on the deal structure, the 20% ROP may significantly
outweigh the 100% ROP each DAOIC member would receive from
their own allocation of capital.
Over time, the members of the DAOIC do not need capital any
longer. All they need is the ability to stake RNFTs on newly
proposed incoming deals. The public market funds the deals and the
DAO members get paid via the 20% public ROP minting to fungible
reputation token.
If members still wish to commit capital on particular deals they can
get into deals on the public market side, based on the same
conditions. But, they would in essence be paying themselves with
the 20% of ROP.
The removal of capital as a necessity for deal participation creates
a very high level of flexibility for DAOIC members. It allows the
DAOIC members to invest if they so choose but it does not force
them to invest, under any conditions. Capital calls are entirely
unnecessary.
DAOIC members can decide which deals are so good that it would
be worth paying themselves the 20% of ROP. Presumably most
deals would be worth it. However, the nature of the publicly listed
fungible reputation token is a much better value proposition for the
DAOIC members, especially in the long run. If a DAOIC member
suffers a liquidity crisis, such member still participates in the
fungible reputation salary payouts.
Not only are members sharing in the ROP of the market with 20%,
which may be much more in the aggregate than the individual
DAOIC members’ ROP, the model also amplifies the DAOIC
member returns because only DAOIC members get paid in fungible
reputation tokens.
Such tokens are themselves a significant value proposition because
the fungible reputation token is based on the deal pipeline upvoted
via RNFT. The token represents the collective wisdom of the DAO
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

investment club members, and in addition, the total ROP (100%
Member PLUS 20% Public ROP) on each deal.
The combined effect of these factors will likely cause the public
perception and corresponding market valuation of the fungible
reputation tokens to be very favorable.
The collective wisdom of DAOIC members helps hedge against
purchase risk. Moreover, because the applicable decentralized
governance with loosesly and tightly coupled votes will very likely
make all tightly coupled votes unanimous, no DAOIC member loses
RNFTs and continues to receive the stream of fungible reputation
tokens. Fungible reputation tokens can be sold to the market as
needed by DAOIC members which provides enhanced liquidity for
VC participants.
The life cycle of the DAOIC involves different phases. During
phase 1, the DAOIC brings in members with their deals and mints
RNFT in proportion to incoming capital. In phase 2, DAOIC
members stake RNFT on incoming deals. The capital committed by
DAOIC members is allocated on the deals and ROP is paid out in
fungible reputation tokens in proportion to each DAOIC member’s
RNFT holdings. During phase 2 the fungible reputation token is
listed on digital asset exchanges. This allows the DAOIC members
to use the fungible reputation token for their own liquidity needs.
The shift away from capital starts incrementally. DAOIC members
may still need to commit capital in phases 1 and 2. However, the
move away from capital commitments is already possible. For
example, in phases 1 and 2, if the market co-purchases at 50% of
capital commitment of a given deal and 20% of the corresponding
ROP on such deal is allocated to the fungible reputation token
minting pool, which is shared only by the DAOIC members, then
the DAOIC members would in the aggregate be better off keeping
their own ROP at 100% (which is proportional to their capital
commitment) combined with the 20% of ROP from public/market
capital commitments in the fungible reputation token, which is paid
out proportionally to RNFT score. This is especially true
considering that the fungible reputation token is itself an investment
proposition that amplifies the DAOIC members’ initial capital
commitment.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

REPUTATION AS CAPITAL
During phase 3, the public co-purchases deals based on the RNFT
staking on deals by the DAOIC members. The public receives their
ROP pro rata to capital commitment in DAI. Phase 3 enables a
consolidation of the shift away from capital. In phase 3, if the
market purchases 100% of capital commitment of a given deal,
based on DAOIC member staking on the deal, and 20% of the
corresponding ROP on such deal is allocated to the fungible
reputation token minting pool, which is shared only by the DAO
investment club members, then the DAOIC members would in the
aggregate be better off keeping their own ROP at 100% (which is
proportional to their capital commitment) combined with the 20%
of ROP from public/market capital commitments in the fungible
reputation token, which is paid out proportionally to RNFT score.
DAOIC can still invest on the public side if they so choose.
VI. Conclusion
The existing VC model is subject to significant ongoing downsides
that inhibits its ability to provide long-term value to the tech startup
community. The existing market for fiat VC investments is subject
to several significant downsides, especially in comparison with the
market for early round digital asset investments.
The reputation as capital model has the potential to overcome many
of the downsides in the existing legacy VC market. Reputation as
capital has the potential to lower capital requirements for VC
businesses significantly and increase liquidity at unprecedented
levels because VCs fungible reputation tokens can be sold to the
market as needed by. In turn, the removal of capital as a necessity
for deal participation creates a very high level of flexibility for VCs.
It allows VC to invest if they so choose but it does not force them
to invest, under any conditions. Capital calls become entirely
unnecessary. VC that suffer a liquidity crisis, would still participate
in the fungible reputation salary payouts.
The industry is still experimenting with different forms of DeFi
capital replacement schemes. It will take time to filter out those
designs that have unanticipated side effects, unexpected hidden
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

incentives and associated behavioral patterns and capital flows. Yet,
the experimentation has already started in 2020 and new designs
and projects materialize quickly with unexpected success stories.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3962614

