DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
DECENTRALIZATION – Why We Need Technology
Infrastructure Upgrades
Wulf A. Kaal**
Abstract
The article shows that the technological precursors of
decentralization require a reexamination of technological
infrastructure for decentralized systems. Highlighting the past and
present events in technology development that helped usher in the
age of decentralization, the article examines the role of
technology-based networking in the evolution of decentralization.
The evolution of increased networking captabilities had real
economic consequences. Platform business proliferation, the API
economy, the sharing economy, and the network information
economy are key examples. Similar economic consequences can
be expected in the aftermath of the decentralized technology
infrastructure evolution. The article concludes with a discussion of
decentralized technology infrastructure upgrades that enable the
evolving age of technology and societal decentralization.
Key Words: Decentralization, History, Digital Assets,
Decentralized Finance, Blockchain, Start-up, Decentralized
Commerce, Emerging Technology, Token Models, Incentive
Design, Tokens, Distributed Ledger Technology, Decentralized
Infrastructure
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
** Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis,
USA). The author is gratefull for ongoing discussions about decentralized
technology solutions with Craig Calcaterra. The author is also grateful for
outstanding research assistance from Hayley Howe and research librarian
assistance from Nicole Kinn. The author did not receive any form of financial
incentive for authoring this article.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................ 2
II. TECHNOLOGY-BASED NETWORK CAPABILITY ..................................... 8
1. Telecommunication ....................................................................... 8
2. Digital Transformation.................................................................. 9
3. Internet of Things ........................................................................ 11
4. Social Media ............................................................................... 12
5. Cloud Computing ........................................................................ 15
6. Peer-to-Peer Networking ............................................................. 17
III. ECONOMIC INSTANTIATION OF INCREASED NETWORK CAPABILITIES
18
1. Platform Business Proliferation ................................................... 19
2. API Economy .............................................................................. 21
3. Sharing Economy ........................................................................ 23
4. Networked Information Economy................................................. 25
IV. OPEN SOURCE MOVEMENT .......................................................... 26
1. History ........................................................................................ 28
2. Proliferation ............................................................................... 29
3. Contributors’ Incentives .............................................................. 31
4. Shortcomings .............................................................................. 33
5. Level of Decentralization............................................................. 36
6. Technological Precursors of Decentralization ............................. 38
7. From Disruptive Fintech to Decentralized Finance (DeFi) .......... 38
8. Digital Transformation as a Pathway to Decentralization ............ 39
9. From IoT to Decentralized Web (Web 3.0) ................................... 41
10. From Social Media to Decentralized Coordination.................. 43
11. Cloud Computing as Inertia for Decentralized Networks ......... 44
12. Peer-to-Peer Network Expansion ............................................ 45
V. THE NEED FOR TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES .............. 46
I. Introduction
The emergence and evolution of decentralization was made
possible by the increasing technology-based network capability of
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
society. Through process innovation in the creation of products
and services, disruptive technological innovations facilitate
exponential technological improvements that create the necessary
environment for increased network capabilities of society.
Technologies that facilitated increased network capability include
telecommunications, the digital transformation, the internet of
things (IoT), social media, cloud computing, and peer-to-peer
networking, among others. The open source movement emerged
out of these disruptions and continues to make significant
contributions to ever increasing connectivity and increased
network capabilities of society. The open source movement
solidified the philosophy and ideas that created the foundation for
future decentralization.
Disruptive technology-based innovation is a gateway for the
increased network capabilities of society. Scientific discoveries
change the existing technological product paradigms and provide
the foundation for more competitive new technologies and
products to emerge. By enabling discontinuous innovations of
processes, products, and services, disruptive technological
innovations facilitate exponential improvements in the value
proposition for customers.
Technology-based networks created the historical foundation for
today’s level of connectivity and network capability for the benefit
of society. The historical elements that brought the levels of
network connections to today’s standards include the internet
boom in the 1980s in combination with telecommunications as
well as the digital transformation of businesses and society that
ramped up in the late 1990s. The emergence of social media and
the internet of things (IoT) at the turn of the century further
extended increased network capabilities of society.
The proliferation of the open source movement created a
significant extension of the ideas that motivated earlier
technology-based networks. The cyberpunk movement during the
development and proliferation of the internet in the 1980s created
an ethos of openness in the developer community. In turn, the
realization in the software development community that
interoperability of software means survivability, gave rise to an
ethos of interoperability. Interoperability required the development
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
of software that could work on different platforms. That evolving
tradition of openness, interoperability, sharing, and cooperation for
the greater good of optimized code gave rise to the open source
movement. Open source developers are self-organized without a
centralized coordinator, other than through the project objective
itself. Collaborator and contributors rarely meet face-to-face, are
self-coordinated with contributions coming from disparate
locations around the world. Contributors volunteer their time to
write, share, and generally support their software without
monetary compensation.
The modalities of historical instances of increased network
capabilities of society provide a precedent for the evolution of
decentralization. While the unprecedented increased network
capabilities of society around the globe is still in many ways in its
infancy, the historical network capability precedent provides an
outlook for the possible future of decentralization.
Disruptive innovation in the internet age creates an environment
that enables ever increasing decentralization. Disruptive
innovation is characterized by scientific discoveries that change
the existing technological product paradigms and provide the
foundation for more competitive new technologies and products to
emerge. Disruptive technological innovations can help facilitate
exponential improvements in the value proposition for customers.
These improvements typical consist of discontinuous innovations
of processes, products, and services. Disruptive technological
innovation can be characterized by the emergence of completely
new technologies, the new combination and application of existing
technologies, and the application of new technologies to specific
societal problem areas, each precipitating a significant paradigm
shift for product technology or creating entirely new paradigms.
Disruptive innovation exemplifies Schumpeter’s “Creative
Destruction,” that is, the creation of competitive strength through
innovation that is followed by new demand in new markets while
destroying older and less competitive technologies and existing
markets that are based on older and less competitive technologies.
Since the mid-1990s, the implications of disruptive technologies
and innovation were becoming increasingly apparent. Disrupter
startups were able to increasingly attract new lower-end
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
consumers by offering inexpensive substitutes for products and
then gradually move upmarket by attracting higher-end
consumers. Legacy businesses had to act quickly when disrupters
appear and either acquire the disrupter or incubate a competing
business that embraces the disruptive technology. A market
leader’s lack of investment in disruptive technologies often results
in the abrupt loss of market dominance or even total replacement
in such markets. Market leaders often shortsightedly refuse to
cannibalize their market dominance through the use of disruptive
technologies. This enables small entrepreneurial firms with no
established customer base to take advantage of disruptive tech-
nologies and redefine such markets.
Revolutionizing products in the past few decades that were based
on disruptive technological innovation and increased network
capabilities of society were typically smaller in size, lighter,
cheaper, more convenient and flexible, more reliable, had better
unit performance with higher efficiency, and were more user
friendly than prior products. These characteristics typically require
significant advances and growth in artificial intelligence and
technologies including micro- or nanotechnologies, as well as
materials and component technologies. A simple example is the
disruption that came with the invention of the smart phone, which
allows people around the world to access information
instantaneously at an unprecedented scale.
So-called big-bang disruptions typically involve increased
compatibility and connectivity with existing products and services.
Big-bang disruptors often offer a much cheaper product in
comparison with the established products, but they are also better
integrated with other products and services and are often more
inventive and flexible. In the social media age, big-bang disruptors
can successfully exploit consumers’ advanced access to product
information and consumers’ ability to contribute to products and
share such contributions and product improvements via social
media and other outlets. Internet fads and products can be
accessible to consumers in the entire world within a matter of
days. Big-bang disrupters typically launch businesses without a
foundation, using cloud computing, open platforms built on the
internet, and fast-cycling mobile devices. Big-bang disrupters
often produce multiple new products to identify which products
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
may take hold in the market. While most such products fail, the
payoff associated with the unconstrained growth of those products
that succeed is substantial and facilitates and often accelerates
other forms of disruptive innovation.
Several examples help illustrate the power of disruptive innovation
and its consequences. Corporate history is littered with numerous
examples of successful companies that drifted into obscurity after
failing to embrace change. Nokia, Kodak, and Blackberry are
prominent examples. All these firms collapsed after fast changes
in their respective markets rendered their products/services no
longer competitive.
Several core common denominators are often associated with
companies that are less successful in a business environment of
disruptive innovation. Such companies usually prefer to
concentrate on the execution of established business models built
around existing and successful products or services. Less
successful companies are also often slow in embracing algorithmic
technologies, data analytics, big data, and platforms. Executives
with a knowledge of, and focus on, innovation and consumer
experience — i.e., those individuals responsible for the initial
success of a company and best placed to deliver relevancy —
often find themselves marginalized from core decision-making
processes in companies that focus on established products.
Less successful companies often share a myopic and short-term
focus on shareholder value maximization that has led to an
unhealthy emphasis on firm share price, market valuations, and
financial metrics that obscure issues of relevancy. Listed
companies, in particular, are prone to put too much emphasis on
financial metrics, such as return on net assets, return on capital
deployed, and internal rate of return. Of course, it is important to
focus on financial metrics. However, it is also important to realize
that an emphasis on measures that aim at quarterly earnings and
short-term stock price performance can easily distract an
organization from the important business task of identifying
strategies that can help a firm remain relevant in the future.
Budgeting is important in this regard. Successful companies are
well padded for potential problems.
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
The disruptive change coming from technological innovation is
often directly linked to the emergence of financial technology
(fintech). Fintech — the intersection of finance and technology—
has revolutionized the traditional landscape of many financial
products and services and changed the lives of business owners.
Since the beginning of the 21st century, the merging of financial
services and technology has been one of the fastest growing
markets, giving rise to companies seemingly overnight.
Technology enables startup companies to compete with financial
market leaders.
FinTech is spurring economic growth and development in many
parts of the world. The introduction of technology into the once
obsolete financial system meant that service providers are now
taking heed of customers’ needs. The innovation of financial
services via technology has created systems that are faster, cheaper
and more convenient for the consumer. As a result, customers turn
away from the legacy institutions that once dominated financial
services. To counteract this trend, established banks and financial
services providers are now turning to technology companies to
innovate and improve their products and services. The joint
venture between Goldman Sachs and Apple to introduce the Apple
Credit card illustrates this point. Goldman Sachs appears to
acknowledge that the future of banking is with the consumer
market, a market it mostly ignored in the past. Fintech brings
information closer to the edge and serves the consumers, it
disrupts centralized structures in finance and forces the disrupted
financial conglomerates to serve the consumer better. As such,
Fintech epitomizes some of the core principles of decentralization.
Like fintech, the merger of the regulatory and legal markets with
technology (RegLegalTech) is changing the legal and regulatory
landscape and decentralizes the application of regulation in many
industries. The RegLegalTech sector has evolved from support
systems to fully integrated and automated services that
increasingly disrupt diverse sets of industries. RegLegalTech can
generally be defined as information technology services and
software, as well as platforms and their applications. Since the
1970s, with the invention of the first legal databases,
RegLegalTech has supported existing ways of operating and
practicing law. In fact, RegLegalTech created the need for
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
additional lawyers to evaluate the new legal materials that are
made more quickly available and more easily accessible by
technology. At first, RegLegalTech made law firms and lawyers
more efficient in performing their activities. Examples include
automated billing, document storage, practice management, and
accounting software. In the early 2010s, RegLegalTech became
more advanced and started to include technology that assisted
legal professionals in due diligence and e-discovery processes.
Since 2015, RegLegalTech has continued to evolve in
unprecedented ways. Multiple startup companies and their
investors have started to capitalize on technologies, and their
applications are already replacing some junior lawyers and
disrupting the existing parameters for the practice of law.
II. Technology-Based Network Capability
Significant factors that helped inaugurate the increasing societal
trends toward decentralization include: ever-increasing
technology-based connectivity and the increased network
capabilities of society.
1. Telecommunication
The meteoric rise of the telecommunications market has increased
network capabilities of society at unprecedented historical levels.
Smartphone’s role in shaping human interaction in the 21st
century has been as dramatic as it is far-reaching. Smartphones
have revolutionized society in less than a decade. With more than
1 billion users worldwide and 2.5 million ever increasing apps
available across Google and Apple’s digital marketplaces,
smartphones are revolutionizing many markets and impact human
behavior at unprecedented levels. With the launch of the iPhone in
2007, smartphone adoption rates quickly exceeded other
technological milestones such as the TV, the personal computer,
the telephone, and the light bulb. The smartphone outpaced the TV
as the consumer technology with the fastest adoption rate,
reaching 40 percent market saturation in just 2 1/2 years. Over
sixty percent of internet traffic today comes from mobile devices
rather than desktops, which long served as the dominant online
portal. Increasing evidence exists that smartphone-enabled search
engines and digitally managed contact lists are affecting how the
human brain processes information. Internet-connected devices
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
have already become a kind of external memory source for many
people. The role of smartphones for societal change can also not
be underestimated. Take for instance, when the Arab Spring began
rippling through the Middle East in early 2011. Demonstrators and
journalists alike used smartphones to gather information quickly
and disseminate it. The smartphone quickly proved to be a
powerful tool for social change. For the unbanked, who lack
access to traditional bank accounts but who nonetheless have high
rates of mobile phone ownership, the smartphone and mobile
money are playing a critical role in financial inclusion. For the
unbanked, the smartphone provides access to stored value
accounts and a growing set of financial services that can change
their lives.
2. Digital Transformation
Digitization, digitalization, and digital transformation are
fundamentally reshaping business and society. Digitization
generally is a reference to optimizing business and other processes
by way of removing paper and removing paper-based processes
through the use of electronic and digital technology. With the
digitization of paper, the manual or mechanical labor that was
previously necessary to process and work with paper-based
processes may no longer needed. Digitization is the start of a
process that may lead into digitalization, which means the use of
digitized and natively digital technologies and of data. In contrast
with digitization, digitalization allows the creation of new revenue
and improves business, beyond mere process optimization. Digital
information and a digital business culture are at the core of the
digitalization of businesses. Digital transformation, in turn, refers
to process innovation in combination with business model
upgrades for businesses. Digital transformation often implies the
fundamental transformation of a business with new capabilities,
enhanced innovation, and the creation of new revenue streams.
A good illustration of a digital transformation is provided by the
John Deere company.1 John Deere built its business as a
manufacturer of equipment with a more traditional business
1 John Deere, https://www.deere.com/en/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
strategy and outlook. With the emergence of digitization and
internet technologies in the late 1990s, John Deere was able to
move from a mere equipment manufacturing business to a service
and data company. Unlike so many other businesses that perished
in the age of accelerating digital innovation because they were
unable to let go of the past and their core business, John Deere
embraced the digital transformation and created entirely new
revenue streams. Through its data capabilities, John Deere became
a trusted advisor to farmers and helped farmers increase their yield
and optimize their businesses. Because of the new business lines
coming out of its digital transformation, John Deere had the
opportunity to combine its new businesses with other innovative
business models from different sectors. The digital transformation
of John Deere’s business culminated in John Deere’s emergence
as a disruptive company that had redefined the farming industry.
The digital transformation of business and society has multiple
interdependent dimensions. The information and information
technology dimensions are integral parts of digitalization and its
value creation. Without the transformation of digitization into
information technology, the digital transformation economy where
digital transformation of a given business moves to the core of that
business, could not have emerged. The digitization of content was
a natural precursor to the internet of things and its progeny. The
proliferation of digital services in the internet of things, in turn,
required a certain depth of digitalization in order for it to connect
with and transform other technologies and to create new business
assets.
Just like previous transformational periods for business and
society, the digital transformation of business and society
inaugurated unprecedented societal change that necessitated a new
infrastructure. Similar to the changes instituted by the steam
engine and the combustion engine during the industrial revolution,
which required new infrastructure tools, such as improved streets,
copper wiring for electricity, light bulbs, new laws, institutions
etc., digital transformation was inhibited until the needed
infrastructure was built, laws were updated, and new institutions
were created.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
The inherent disruption associated with digital transformation
creates challenges for existing businesses. Similar to the disruptive
change during the industrial revolution, the digital transformation
of business began with many competing startups, inventors, and
businesses, but most businesses were flushed out, resulting in only
a few winners. These winning businesses made significant lasting
contributions to society. Just as the inventions that empowered the
industrial revolution disrupted old industries while giving rise to
new ones, digital transformation provided the same disruption.
Digitization was a precursor to peer-to-peer transactions at scale.
Correspondingly, the digital transformation of business enabled
for the first time in history a form of decentralized production at
lower cost.
3. Internet of Things
The increasing connectivity in society that was inaugurated by the
telecommunications industry, especially by the smartphone, and
the digital transformation is further extended by the emergence of
the internet of things (IoT). IoT as a phenomenon is probably best
described as a giant network involving connectivity between
people, people and devices, and devices and other devices.
Connecting non-human devices and service providers via the
internet is at the heart of IoT. Such connected devices can include
anything from washing machines to coffee makers and toasters as
well as components of machines, e.g. the soap box of the washing
machine that may automatically order new liquid soap from a
connected service provider, such as Amazon and importantly,
sensors and related devices, for security, monitoring, agricultural
and other uses.
The ideal typical conditions for the proliferation of IoT can be
traced to a combination of factors. Connecting an unprecedented
amount of devices over the internet was made possible through the
proliferation of broadband internet connections and is further
expanded through the emergence of 5G telecommunication
networks and skyrocketing smartphone penetration worldwide. At
the same time, an increasing amount of devices are being created
with built-in Wi-Fi and sensors that further multiply the
availability of connectivity and with it connected devices.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
Significantly, the cost of technology is decreasing at the same
time.
Big data, generated by mobile telecommunication and IoT devices
is also a significant driver of increased network capabilities of
society. Being able to access and evaluate entire datasets, rather
than a small sample thereof, allows researchers to understand
unprecedented correlations. Improved understanding of
correlations in network data, in turn, facilitates accelerated and
improved connectivity. Big data in the form of digitized data that
grows at exponential rates and can be captured and manipulated
electronically draws on several core sources including the internet
of things, public records, social media, and cameras, as well as
satellite tracking. Big data benefits not only include industry and
researchers, but also increase consumer connectivity and choice
through publicly available websites providing big data analyses
intended to support consumers’ decision-making processes.
AI increased network capabilities of society. Many sectors of the
economy are already significantly affected by the rapid advances
in AI during the past decade. Most significantly, AI has the
capacity to process and allocate the data generated by IoT and will
help companies figure out ways to track, store, and analyze the
significant increases in data that will be generated by many
billions of devices. With the help of AI, the new data provided by
IoT can help increase and optimize the connectivity of people to
people, people to devices, and devices to devices. AI can help
improve what and how people and devices should be connected
because the connections serve their respective needs.
4. Social Media
Social media has increased network capabilities of society at
unprecedented rates in human history. The social media-generated
increase in virtual communication resulted in about one fourth of
humanity interacting on social media in some capacity.
According to recent estimates, overall 2.3 million worldwide
active social media users exist. The overwhelming majority of
large corporate brands have two or more social media platforms.
Social media has changed the way most businesses operate and
run on a daily basis.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
Social media facilitates a more democratic proliferation of
information dissemination in society. Network effects facilitate the
unprecedented expansion and proliferation of social media. Social
media networks become more useful and powerful with each
added user. As users interact with others, social networks become
more powerful as they grow. Information sharing via social media
happens at scale and creates power and influence for the creators.
Social media as a means of distributing information, allows the
content creators to harness that power because power is allocated
to the most popular content. The longer the information is in
circulation, the more discussion it generates and the greater the
impact of social media. According to some estimates, the average
life expectancy of a given content posted on the web is 2.6 days,
compared to 3.2 days for content shared on social media, a
difference of over 23%.2
Cross-pollination from telecommunications and the IoT has
accelerated the proliferation of social media and the associated
increase in network capabilities of society. Across the globe,
consumers spend most time online with their mobile devices.
According to some estimates, consumers in Indonesia spend over
ninety percent of their time online via mobile devices, followed by
over seventy percent in the USA and China.3 Whereas technology-
based disruptive innovation mostly creates challenges for brick-
and mortar businesses, social media allows business across the
fray to generate demand, insights, and create targeted product
offerings. Traditional brick-and-motor businesses and e-commerce
businesses benefit from social media alike.
Social media improves the exchange of knowledge and removes
societal boundaries. For example, cross-racial dating and
marriages have increased through online dating portals. Social
2 Carr, Clare (Apr. 13, 2015). The Data Behind the Average Article Lifespan.
Parse.ly, https://blog.parse.ly/post/1768/data-on-article-lifespans/ (accessed
June 1, 2020).
3 Chaffey, Dave (Nov. 11, 2019). Mobile Marketing Statistics Compilation.
Smart Insights, https://www.smartinsights.com/mobile-marketing/mobile-
marketing-analytics/mobile-marketing-statistics/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
media can help spread otherwise highly specialized knowledge
shared by specialists. Ultimately, social media’s function is to
incentivize people to see and respond to content. The use of social
media is significantly increasing in learning.4 It raises the level of
interaction and helps create a more skilled and knowledgeable
work force. Enhanced knowledge sharing, in organizations and
society at large, can help eliminate silos and information privileges
and, thus, removes boundaries.
Social media transfers knowledge from the edges of society into
the mainstream. Because social media allows people to
communicate with one another more freely, it supports the
creation of influential social organizations among once-
marginalized groups. Social media allows people who hold
otherwise marginalized or underappreciated views to meet kindred
spirits online and form groups that promote their shared ideas.
When these newly formed social networks grow they can increase
their influence incrementally and promote their perspectives until
they become more mainstream. Otherwise invisible social, ethical,
environmental, political issues can thus gain traction rather
quickly. Increased visibility of these issues can transfer the
balance of power on these issues from the hands of a few to the
mainstream of the masses.
The increased network capabilities of society that are promoted by
social media can change society’s coordination functions.
Traditional modes of coordinating human behavior by way of
political decision making, democratic institutions, business
governance, among many others, used centralized means of
information dissemination to coordinate behavior. As the
information that influences the coordination of human behavior
increasingly comes from the edges, the coordination of human
behavior changes. Despite the control of the internet through
several companies, using a more diverse set of information
sources, humans can coordinate their behavior through the internet
4 Seaman, Jeff & Tinti-Kane, Hester (Oct. 2013). Social Media for Teaching
and Learning. Pearson Learning Solutions and the Babson Survey Research
Group, https://onlinelearningsurvey.com/reports/social-media-for-teaching-and-
learning-2013-report.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
for a more diverse set of causes that would have remained
marginalized in the centralized environment before the rise of
social media.
The social media crowd takes over an otherwise centralized
societal coordination function. Whereas in the past, product
information was centrally disseminated and evaluated on
consumer’s behalf, with the rise of social media, it is possible to
assess products or information through the power of the crowd.
For instance, when products attract a lot of shares on social media,
it typically benefits sales of a given product. The consumer crowd
on social media uses shares, that is, how often a given post or
information was shared with their network, as a proxy for a quality
assessment. On the other hand, the lack of shares for a given
product can trigger consumer distrust. Product or content specific
conduct on social media thus becomes a form of ‘social proof.’5
Because the incentive design for social proof is suboptimal, the
social media coordination function is still largely flawed.
Decentralized technology solutions, however, can tap into the
coordination function that was inaugurated by social media and
improve it.
5. Cloud Computing
Cloud computing has facilitated a significant extension of the
digital transformation by way of further enhancing connectivity at
the enterprise level. Cloud computing is characterized by the on-
demand availability of digital and computing resources, such as
computing power or data storage. Contrasting prior solutions that
used a local server or a personal computer to manage computing
resources, in cloud computing, a network of remote servers hosted
on the internet is used to store, manage, and process data. Users
access these resources on-demand without direct active
management by the user. Data centers provide a prominent
example of cloud computing. Data centers provide services such
as computing power or data storage available to many users over
5 Marsden, Dr. Paul (2012). The Social Commerce Handbook. Blacklick:
McGraw-Hill Publishing.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
the internet without any direct active management or control by
the users.
Historically, cloud computing began as attempts to optimize
networks. While references to cloud computing emerged in
computer science as early as 1996, in internal documents at
Compaq, the term "Cloud computing" itself became more
commonly used after Amazon in 2006 released its Elastic
Compute Cloud product. The first attempts at cloud computing
started with virtual private networks (VPNs) in the 1990s.
Telecom companies in the 1990s used VPNs to replace dedicated
point-to-point data circuits with similar quality of service but at
lower costs. VPNs allowed them to use network bandwidth more
effectively. Computing and telecom companies started to use a
cloud symbol to denote the demarcation point between network
responsibility for the user versus the network provider.
The rapid development of cloud computing has significant
disruptive effects. In the future, it is hard to imagine that
traditional data centers and the traditional models for delivering
information technology (IT) and IT services will be able to survive
or stay competitive. For companies, owning their own hardware
and building their own data centers does not appear to be cost
effective in the future. Cloud computing vendors will solve the
computing hardware problem, leading to computing infrastructure
to becoming a commodity except for maintenance on local
equipment. Businesses that operate primarily from the cloud are
more flexible, more productive, and overall, more efficient.
The future of cloud computing brings humanity to ever increasing
connectivity. Individual networks will become redundant and
most systems will be integrated into a network. Because of the
increased connectivity, enabled by cloud computing, software
applications integrate seamlessly with each other and with the
human environment, regardless of location. One-to-one
application integration processes will be transformed via meta
languages into mass enabled applications that can connect with
each other to exchange data. Consumers will expect applications
to be more connected and more versatile and the applications with
the most connectivity are becoming the most effective and, thus,
most popular.
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
6. Peer-to-Peer Networking
The historical development of peer-to-peer networking
inaugurated the decentralized technology evolution. The term
peer-to-peer networking describes a distributed applications
architecture that distributes and partitions computing workloads or
tasks between peer computers or nodes. Such nodes are equal
contributors with equal privileges in the application, forming the
peer-to-peer network of nodes. The distributed nature of the
network is made possible through the removal of centralized hosts
and servers. Instead, the nodes that form the network make
computing resources, such as disk storage, network bandwidth,
and processing power, directly available to each other. Unlike
traditional client-server models, that divide the consumption and
supply of computing resources, nodes in decentralized peer-to-
peer networks are both consumers and suppliers of computing
resources.
The transition from a traditional client-server computing
architecture to a peer-to-peer networking architecture was made
possible by the inversion of the role of the audience in the
network. The demand for a file in a traditional client-server
architecture is directly proportional to the bandwidth it consumed.
By contrast, in the peer-to-peer network, higher demand for a file
triggers higher levels of seeding nodes for the high demand file.
The higher seeding level for the file lowers the delivery cost for
each distributed file. Accordingly, a peer-to-peer computing
architecture is more efficient than the traditional client-server
architecture. The traditional client-server architecture is subject to
the linearly increasing per-unit costs whereas with a peer-to-peer
network, cost decreasse with each added node. Network effects
proliferate in peer-to-peer networks as each node that joins the
network both consumes network resources but also provides
resources to the network. Because of its cost structure, the
traditional architecture is more subject to competition than the
peer-to-peer architecture.
The heritage of peer-to-peer networks goes back half a century.
The transition from a traditional client-server computing
architecture to a peer-to-peer networking architecture was made
possible by several core projects and their developer teams. While
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
this short history of peer-to-peer networks perhaps was made most
famous by the file sharing system Napster, which was released in
1999, the following projects, most of whom are still active, are
worth mentioning in chronological order:
1. In 1969, the Arpanet connected several preeminent computing
research institutions and treated each institution node as an equal
computing peer, not in a client-server format.
2. In 1979, Usenet was based on the Unix-to-Unix protocol and
allowed Unix machines to exchange files,
3. In the late 1990s, Napster file sharing was made possible
through the then new data compression technologies. In less than a
year, Napster had over one million members.
4. In 2000, Gnutella allowed users to find each other remotely,
removing Napster’s need of central indexing servers. At the same
time, Freenet significantly enhanced user anonymity by
connecting users only through intermediate nodes and storing
encrypted snippets of files;
5. In 2001, BitTorrent allowed nodes to connect directly through a
TCP port and later implemented distributed hash tables for peer-
to-peer discovery. Even if government authorities shut down
specific servers, the BitTorrent network could not be shut down
because nodes could update their own routing tables indefinitely.
6. In 2009, Bitcoin was released by Satoshi Nakamoto as a
blockchain with a distributed registry that allowed it to store with
each node an incrementally growing registry of transactions that
could not be changed. The underlying consensus mechanism of
Bitcoin could be abstracted into many different use cases above
and beyond storing data and transacting in a store of value.
III. Economic Instantiation of Increased Network
Capabilities
The ever-increasing technology-based connectivity and increased
network capabilities of society have had several historic economic
instantiations. The combination of technology development and
business applications of technological innovations created the
historical foundation for network-based decentralized structures.
Economic incentive design is an integral part of decentralized
technology and decentralized network proliferation. For example,
token economic incentive designs in decentralized systems are an
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
important network feature. The existing economic network designs
are a precursor of what future economic applications and incentive
designs for decentralized networks could encapsulate.
1. Platform Business Proliferation
Internet-based platform businesses have been proliferating since
the dot.com boom at the end of 2000. A platform business model
enables exchanges between two or more interdependent but
otherwise disconnected groups, such as producers and consumers,
to transact business and create value. Examples include Google,
Facebook, YouTube, Airbnb, Uber, eBay, Alibaba, and PayPal.
Platform businesses create scalable networks of users and
resources that can be accessed on demand. To build a growing
digital environment and the associated revenues, companies have
integrated their core business functions into platforms to create
synergies with third parties. To participate in the value creation of
platforms, companies are either trying to become a part of an
existing ecosystem or create an ecosystem for their unique
offering, service, or products.
The platforms facilitate and coordinate unprecedented connectivity
between multiple entities, individuals, business partners, and
individual end users. The entities and individuals include the
platform owners, the platform itself, the data that is generated by
the platform and monetized by the platform, the technology that is
improved by the platform and in turn enables the platform itself to
be operational for business, as well as creative communities, users
extractors, other joint ventures or partners.
Platform businesses thrive because they facilitate increased
connectivity between consumers and producers. Digital and
internet-based platform businesses that increased the connectivity
between consumers and producers have had significant disruptive
effects on many industries. For example, Amazon and Uber,
among many others, have built multi-billion-dollar businesses at
unprecedented speed in the corporate world. In their paths, these
platform businesses are often challenging or removing entire
incumbent businesses and disrupting entire industries. This new
business paradigm, depends on the ability to create unique
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
technology platforms that are intelligent, open, scalable, and
increase connectivity.
Platform businesses build and enhance technology infrastructure.
The connectivity improvements have knock on effects on
technology development because the platforms generate data that
is used by the platforms to monetize but also to improve their own
technologies. The thus improved technologies, in turn, enable the
platforms to improve their services and product offerings which
generates even more data. The feedback effects between data
generation and technology optimization and vice versa creates a
permanent learning and optimization environment for platform
businesses.
Internet-based platform services are partially so successful
because their peer-to-peer capabilities, in connecting consumer
and producers, make them compelling, efficient, and attractive to
consumers in a fast-changing world, leading consumers to place
their trust in new businesses and brands. Search algorithms, data
analytics, and improvements in usability have increased trust in
consumers by minimizing bad experiences, maximizing great
experiences, and avoiding unwanted issues. With the increasing
availability of big data, deep learning, machine learning, sensors
and sensor data, such technology-driven evolution of internet-
based platform businesses can be expected to expand rapidly. The
S&P 500 index has seen many of platform-based companies
become its largest and fastest growing listed companies.
Once internet-based platform businesses become fully fledged
ecosystems, they can further scale and optimize their business.
Whereas in the past, business innovation required coordination of
materials, sourcing, distribution, customer sales and service mostly
in silos to protect from competition, today a business ecosystem
enables customers, partners and vendors alike to efficiently
exchange value. Because ecosystems lower barriers to entry and
enhance connectivity between organizations, consumers,
individual departments and related industries, they help companies
get closer to customers. The connectivity-based profitability is
further increased because ecosystems allow the connected
businesses to gather and analyze big datasets generated by the
ecosystem for the betterment of all ecosystem participants. This
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
data sharing allows ecosystem participants to learn more about
their shortcomings and optimize their businesses. For example,
Amazon was able to utilize data coming from multiple data points
in its ecosystem to optimize its distribution and supply channels
and personalize customer recommendations that created
significantly higher sales.
The business models promulgated by the increasing proliferation
of platform businesses will likely become the de-facto standard for
the platform-based digital transformation of the future. The digital
transformation of business, starting in the 1990s, was a critical
factor for business success that enabled the proliferation of
platform businesses and technology innovation. For example, the
increasing use of telecommunications, the digitization, IoT, social
media, cloud computing, and peer-to-peer networking, in
combination with big data functionalities allowed for more
seamless integration with cloud computing. The increased
flexibility and proliferating scale of the digital transformation via
cloud computing allows the enhancement of existing legacy
business processes far more easily. Facilitated by platforms and
ecosystems, companies can engage in joint ventures and
partnerships and grow quicker together through the easier
integration of services and products.
2. API Economy
Application programming interfaces (APIs) provide
unprecedented connectivity in digital applications and business.
An API is a computing interface or computing communication
protocol between a server and a client. Its job is to provide
standard best in class services generally offering specific
solutions, most often used by the provider as part of their offering
to end customers, that can be used by partnering companies to
gain the advantage proven technology provides. Two very
successful early entrants into the API markets were PayPal and
Salesforce, enabling very sophisticated solutions that would be
nearly impossible to equal. APIs make it easier to integrate and
connect data, algorithms, systems, and people, share data and
information and authenticate people and things by leveraging
third-party algorithms and enabling transactions. Through these
features, APIs help create new user experiences, new
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
product/services and business models. APIs simplify the building
of client-side software through a set of procedures and functions
that enable applications that access the features or data of an
application, operating system, or other service. APIs create the
standards that allow companies to exchange data and build
seamless omni-channel experiences for their customers. Because
of their key accessibility features, APIs facilitate the
interoperability of otherwise centralized unconnected computing
systems.
The term “API Economy” generally refers to APIs’ ability to
increase organizational effectiveness and profitability in
businesses through its ability to increase interoperability of
otherwise disparate systems. Historically, mostly software
professionals concerned themselves with the use of APIs to
overcome incompatible software systems. Over time, however, the
increased compatibility of software solutions and heightened
interoperability of systems increased the value proposition of
emerging technologies. The ability to attain additional revenue
through the application and use of third-party APIs was perhaps
most visible in enterprise applications of mobile solutions, social
networking, financial services, and web-based applications.
APIs disrupt traditional value-chain hierarchies. Through the use
of APIs, companies no longer need to control the entire value
chain because it is much cheaper and technologically often easier
to create application features in separate products that connect via
APIs to existing ecosystems and/or other products. Through the
connectivity in APIs, companies can combine individual products
as building blocks that, if connected, can function as a single
product or proposition that satisfies particular consumer needs that
are otherwise not fulfilled in the ecosystem but technologically
possible.
The ever-growing API Economy benefits from technology-based
increases in network capabilities of business and society and vice
versa. Technologies that increase network capabilities of business
and society invariably rely on APIs to facilitate interoperability
and / or increased connectivity. Such technologies and businesses
include telecommunications, mobile phones, the digital
transformation of businesses, the IoT, social media, cloud
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
computing and peer-to-peer networking. As these technologies and
business proliferate, the API Economy grows in lockstep.
The API Economy thrives particularly because several sectors
increasingly relied on APIs and merged their efforts via APIs to
create significant synergies. An organizations’ profitability in a
given sector benefits from the creation of new API-powered
capabilities and services. The more popular a given service that
relies on APIs, the more the underlying business will consider
APIs as a factor in its business model and strategy.
APIs foster connectivity-based innovation. Companies can use
APIs to expand their innovative product offerings and designs by
connecting their existing offerings via APIs with building blocks
to other products and designs that are external to the company.
Such API-based business expansions often result in more efficient
and more scalable distribution channels for the respective
company. API platforms enable the expansion of existing products
into more comprehensive products by delivering much needed
additional features and capabilities. For example, a banks’ API
strategy, that is their ability to connect to other services and
products, is instrumental to their respective brands and
ecosystems.
APIs can transform businesses into platforms that expand value.
Platforms can expand and multiply the creation of value in a given
business. Such value creation is possible because platforms enable
business ecosystems inside and outside of the respective company.
3. Sharing Economy
Peer-to-peer connectivity is at the heart of the sharing
economy. The term ‘sharing economy’ is often used to refer to the
distribution of services and goods and the partial use of others’
property rights in goods. For instance, you might provide your car,
or your time, as part of a peer-to-peer transaction, often over a
platform built to unite the interested parties. Unlike traditional
centralized ways of production and selling to consumers by hiring
employees, platform companies in the sharing economy typically
provide the technological setup that allows individuals to share
their property rights in goods or sell their services without
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
centralized employment. Individuals who connect via platforms in
the sharing economy share their property rights in, for example,
cars, homes, or rent out their personal skillsets and time in a peer-
to-peer form of engagement.
The sharing economy has become part of modern society’s
mainstream. The origins of the sharing economy can be traced
back to an emphasis on sustainability, resource efficiency, and
community. As the sharing economy evolved, not only did its
services and industry acceptance proliferate, the sharing
economy’s credo of “Access over ownership” became more
mainstream. The public had grown accustomed to receiving
services and goods on-demand via digital and mobile
technologies. On-demand access to goods and services became
part of modern society, it became no longer a preference and habit
of millennials alone.
The sharing economy necessitated a reframing of legacy legal
regimes and frameworks. The legal frameworks that regulate
disrupted and associated industries were often incompatible with
the emerging trends generated by the sharing economy. Cities and
co-municipalities had to learn that the sharing economy requires a
proactive stance to channel the sharing economy’s outputs and
associated new requirements into economic development while at
the same time protecting the public with regulation. While some
cities have joined forces to declare common commitments and
principles for sharing cities6 and many co-municipalities are
developing transportation-as-a-service platforms to better meet the
needs of all residents, some states in the United States have passed
legislation that in some ways undermine the sharing economy.7
6 Share Barcelona, https://share.barcelona/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
7 Ballotpedia (2017). Local Government Responses to the Sharing Economy
(ridesharing/homesharing),
https://ballotpedia.org/Local_government_responses_to_the_sharing_economy_
(ridesharing/homesharing) (accessed June 1, 2020); Chapman, Lizette,
Eidelson, Josh, Cutler, Joyce E. & Bloomberg (Sept. 11, 2019). New Labor Bill
Passed by California Senate Would Transform the Gig Economy -- And Could
Cost Uber $500 Million a Year. Fortune: Tech,
https://fortune.com/2019/09/11/gig-economy-california-senate-uber-law-labor-
rights-union/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
Yet, some countries, such as Denmark, have changed their internal
regulations to better accommodate sharing economies.8
The values that enabled the kickstart of the sharing economy
morphed from an emphasis on connectivity for the sake of
sustainability to a focus on connectivity and community as a
commodity. In other words, connectivity and community building
via increased connectivity became a purpose and meaning by
itself. The purpose of sharing economy participants shifted from
connectivity for a cause, such as a community for sustainability,
toward mass consumption for convenience and transactional
efficiency.
The ultimate sign of the sharing economy’s success is its
increasing recognition in policy, economic, and business circles,
as part of the overall economy. The sharing economy has the
potential to shape entire markets that are better connected and
more efficient. It has started to blur the lines between industries
and even former competitors.
4. Networked Information Economy
The networked information economy9 is the extension and
combination of factors emanating from the proliferation of
internet-based platform businesses, the API economy, as well as
elements from the sharing economy. Based on the proliferating
peer-to-peer exchange of information, the networked information
economy may be replacing the centralized industrial information
economy of the late-nineteenth century.10 The greater role of
decentralized individual action is made possible through much
easier access to information, by way of social media, among
others. With the easier access to information comes the significant
reduction in communication costs. Peer-to-peer production is a
8 Ritzau (May 18, 2018). In World First, AirBnB to Report Income Directly to
Danish Authorities. The Local dk, https://www.thelocal.dk/20180518/in-world-
first-airbnb-to-report-income-directly-to-danish-authorities (accessed June 1,
2020).
9 Benkley, Yochai (2006). The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production
Transforms Markets and Freedom. Yale University Press: New Haven.
10 Ibid.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
natural corollary of cost efficiencies created by organizing on
peer-to-peer bases.
The network information economy’s emphasis of increased flow
and availability of information is made possible by several core
factors. Lower communication cost and more diverse sources of
information from the edges of the system and society enable the
coordination of productive efforts. The availability of information
in structures is not consumptive and does not deplete. Computing
power in structures is progressively less expensive and production
cost are correspondingly low. Because individual inputs come
increasingly from the edges of the system, the inputs are less
homogenous and more diverse which increases the utility of
network membership for each member or node.
IV. Open Source Movement
The open source movement is defined by the core characteristics
of open source software. The Open Source Initiative defines open
source software by its terms of distribution, not just the free access
to source code. The following are core defining criteria of open
source software:
1. Free redistribution.
2. The program includes source code and allows distribution of
source and binary code and obfuscating source code is prohibited.
3. Derived works can be distributed under the same terms as the
original code.
4. The integrity of the author's source code has to be maintained.
5. Any open source license must not discriminate against any
person or group of persons.
6. Any open source license must not discriminate against anyone
who wishes to make use of the open source code in a specific field
of endeavor.
7. Licensed rights associated with open source code transfer to
anyone to whom the code is redistributed.
8. Open source code licenses are not specific to a product and
anyone who is a recipient of the open source code by way of
distribution has the same rights as the original software licensee.
9. An open source software license must not restrict other software
distributed along with the licensed open source software.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
10. An Open source software license must be technology-neutral
and cannot be predicated on any individual technology or type of
technology interface.11
The definition of open source software provided by the Open
Source Initiative follows several core rationales that apply to open
source code. For instance, the requirement of free redistribution
creates incentives for contributors to focus on long-term
objectives. Un-obfuscated original source code is necessary in
order to modify the original code and thus enable the original code
to evolve. Evolution of open source code necessitates
experimentation and in turn requires open redistribution of code
modifications. Changes to original source code must be
identifiable by way of the distribution of pristine base sources plus
patches so the authors’ incentives and reputation are protected and
contributors and users know what original work they are
supporting and changing. To ensure optimal diversity of
contributors, no contributor can be discriminated against in the
open source development process by way of an open source
license. Therefore, open source licenses cannot incorporate any
restrictions and commercial users are freely included.12
11 Open Source Initiative (2007). The Open Source Definition,
https://opensource.org/docs/osd (accessed June 1, 2020), the OSD were
originally derived from the Debian Social Contract: Debian (Apr. 26, 2004).
Debian Social Contract, https://www.debian.org/social_contract#guidelines
(accessed June 1, 2020). Because of the open source nature and its transparency,
any definition of open source software is necessarily incomplete and tentative.
Several alternatives and critiques were published: Feller, Joseph & Fitzgerald,
Brian (2002). Understanding Open Source Software Development. Addison-
Wesley; UK; Wang, Huaiqing & Wang, Chen (Mar/Apr. 2001). Open Source
Software Adoption: A Status Report. IEEE Software, 18:2, 90-95; Capiluppi,
Andrea, Lago, Patricia, & Morisio, Maurizio (April 2003). Characteristics of
Open Source Projects [Conference Paper]. Proceedings of the Euromicro
Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/4010991_Characteristics_of_open_so
urce_projects [PDF Available], 317–330; Krishnamurthy, Sandeep (April
2002). Cave or Community? An Emprirical Examination of 100 Mature Open
Source Projects. First Monday,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220167093_Cave_or_Community_An
_Empirical_Examination_of_100_Mature_Open_Source_Projects [PDF
Available].
12 Open Source Initiative (2007). The Open Source Definition (Annotated),
https://opensource.org/docs/definition.php (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
1. History
The core open source software development community emerged
from the early days of the development of the Internet. During the
1960 and 1970s, the academic research and software development
at leading universities in the United States necessitated the
exchange of information. Because the academic community
needed core infrastructure products for their respective projects,
yet infrastructure elements were not in place at the time, the
exchange of information became a natural side effect of software
development and research.
Corporate research laboratories followed a similar pattern of
exchange and community effort in software development in the
early 1960 and 1970s. For instance, Bell Labs and Xerox’s Palo
Alto Research Center wanted to incentivize intrinsically motivated
projects among their highly skilled developer workforce.
Accordingly, such corporate research laboratories gave their
developers near complete autonomy in the pursuit of personal
projects that had a rather limited association with the corporate
products or services. What made this autonomy even more
remarkable was the sharing of information the corporate entities
permitted for the furtherance of the research, in the spirit of
academic freedom. The academic research in combination with
the significant freedom facilitated by corporate research
laboratories in these years created a culture of exchange and
cooperation that permeated the software development
communities around the world for decades to come.
The proliferation of the open source software movement derives in
part from the nature of the developed software itself. The
realization in the software development community that
interoperability means survivability, especially during the infancy
of the software development movement, gave rise to an ethos of
interoperability. Interoperability required the development of
software that could work on different platforms. In turn, the ethos
of interoperability necessitated exchange and cooperation among
the developer community itself.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
Several examples illustrate the power of open source software
development. An open source software program such as Apache,
for instance, is used by the majority of web servers on the public
internet.13 Apache is an open source software product that was
developed by teams of hundreds of developers around the world.
Users of Apache around the world also report bugs or request
enhancements. Developers and users alike are not paid for their
efforts. Fully funded commercial products developed by Sun,
Oracle, Microsoft, among other companies are forced to compete
with Apache.
Unix is another example of a successful open source project. Some
of the biggest internet-based platform companies of the world,
including Google and Amazon, use the Linux operating system.
The development process that enabled the Unix operating system
in the 1970s provides an ideal example of the evolution of open
source development. Unix epitomizes interoperability because its
functionality can be extended through user programs built on a
standard programming interface. Unix programs are also designed
around a standardized text interface and a core kernel that
manages the system and other processes. The software that was
originally developed at AT&T’s Bell Laboratories was
subsequently installed freely across institutions.
2. Proliferation
According to some estimates, open source software accounts
for between 78%14 and 98%15 of all core digital infrastructure
software. Many of the most successful open source projects can
trace their adoption increases over the last twenty five years to the
accelerating global E-Commerce uses for open source code.
13 Netcraft (April 15, 2010). April 2010 Web Server Survey,
https://news.netcraft.com/archives/2010/04/15/april_2010_web_server_survey.h
tml (accessed June 1, 2020).
14 Black Duck Software (April 15, 2015). 2015 Future of Open Source Survey
Results. Synopsis, https://www.slideshare.net/blackducksoftware/2015-future-
of-open-source-survey-results (accessed June 1, 2020).
15RogueWave Software (2017). 2017 Open Source Support Report: Trends,
Issues, and Surprises in OSS,
https://www.roguewave.com/sites/rw/files/documents/roguewave-open-source-
support-report2017-vf4-digital.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
Examples include and open source operating systems such as
Linux and BSD Unix, open source web-servers such as Apache,
iPlanet and Netscape, e-mail servers such as Sendmail, as well as
open source languages such as Java, Python, GCC, Tk/TCL, and
Perl. Because of their increasing applications and use cases, the
most significantly proliferating existing open source projects
include: Linux, Apache, Mozilla, Bugzilla, Topologilinux, Frozen
Bubble, Tux Typing, Project @ssistant, and Junit.16
The open source movement is a natural derivative of the
software development community culture. Software development
is a community effort by nature. Accordingly, a tradition of
sharing and cooperation for the greater good of optimized code is
a natural part of software development. Open source developers
are generally self-organized. Collaborator and contributors rarely
meet face-to-face, are self-coordinated with contributions coming
from disparate locations around the world. Contributors volunteer
their time to write, share, and support their software without
monetary compensation.
The proliferation of open source software can also be traced to
the increasing use of open source software by governments and
commercial enterprises. Starting in 2016, several worldwide
operating corporations, including Google, Walmart, AT&T, and
Microsoft, among others, joined or expanded the open source
ecosystem. Similarly, governments around the world are
embracing the open source movement. Bulgaria, the USA,17
Norway, Brazil, and China, among several others have increased
their open source uses and contributions. For governments,
adopting open source software can increase security because
vulnerabilities are often identifiable by experts before they
materialize in applications. Moreover, open source software is
typically much cheaper for governments as it can be modified for
multiple needs in multiple departments without the need to
16 SourceForge, SourceForge.net (accessed June 1, 2020).
17 Code, code.gov (accessed June 1, 2020).
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
purchase commercial software licenses and the need to commit
and get locked in by a single commercial software vendor.
3. Contributors’ Incentives
Why would software developers and architects choose to make
unpaid volunteer contributions to open source projects? A variety
of motivational factors influence the contribution process for open
source projects. Software developers perform a cost-benefit
analysis when they decide to make an open source project
contribution and throughout the respective project. Dedicating
time and efforts are costly because the volunteer is not making
money in the meantime and is slowing down on other projects he
or she may be working on at the same time. Those opportunity
costs, e.g. the cost of being able to do something in the meantime
that would generate an economic benefit, need to be offset.
Incentives to contribute to open source projects come in many
forms and offset the opportunity costs to the software developer.
First and perhaps foremost, the developer obtains a personal
satisfaction and joy out of working on an open source project and
contributing to its mission. This personal joy can have many facets
but may include the feeling of satisfaction that comes from
contributing to something that makes the contributor feel like he or
she created something that makes the world a better place. The
open source contribution can also give developers a significant
sense of freedom and autonomy as nobody typically supervises the
open source development. Peer recognition of one’s programming
skills has also most certainly been a significant motivator for
contributors since the early days of open source projects.
Moreover, the software developer may learn something during the
open source project that increases his or her skillset. The new
skills may make the software developer a stronger developer with
enhanced employment opportunities. As a matter of fact, a
corporation that employs a software developer who works on open
source projects may benefit indirectly from the enhanced skillset
of the software developer, which in turn may improve the
corporations’ products.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
The transparent nature of open source projects facilitates
comparatively higher levels of signaling for contributors. Because
anybody can access the open source code, contributors’ peers and
future employers can examine the individual contribution as well
as its quality. Quality measures here refer to the impact of a
respective contribution, whether it solved a problem that others
could not solve and how innovative and workable the solution
was.
Open source software development taps into the herd mentality of
the software development community. Some lone-wolf
programmers may simply want an audience to impress their peers.
Yet, many open source software projects become so popular
because the quality of the project and the code inaugurated by a
lone-wolf may be so high that other programmers become inspired
by the vision of the project. The herd mentality of the software
community suggests that developers want to be part of the moving
train in software development. In other words, they want to work
on projects with a vision that attracts a large number of other
developers and creates a critical mass. Several factors have to be
combined to create liftoff for an open source project including but
not limited to the following:
1. Vision
2. Overall industry trend
3. High level of talent
4. High quality code
5. High number on the core development team
Open source contributions can have a commercial objective. Peer
recognition derived from open source contributions can lead to
funding for the developers’ projects via venture capital and it can
lead to paid engagements from startups or corporations job offers.
Even if software engineers may predominantly make open source
contributions to impress their peers, the open source work can also
function as a signaling device to get involved in interesting
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
cutting-edge projects that may in the long-run enhance the resume
and open opportunities for the contributor that would otherwise
not exist.
Developers may not be entirely altruistically motivated when they
join an open source project. Open source projects have the
capacity to lower development cost because of the path
dependencies that are being created by open source software and
the legacy effects that are associated with that. More junior
developers can learn with and from open source code. When they
enter the workforce such junior developers are already familiar
with the core concepts, which reduces their overall cost and makes
it more likely to engage with open source code.
4. Shortcomings
Despite all of the advantages, open source projects are subject to
several shortcomings. Perhaps most significantly, most open
source projects cannot reach critical mass to further their
development agenda. Only a small number of elite open source
projects can attract developer contributions. The majority simply
cannot attract a sufficient amount of developers who believe in the
vision of the project to create critical mass. Once critical mass is
accomplished the respective project can become almost a self-
fulfilling prophecy. The development of Linux is one of those
examples.
Unlike their centralized counterparts, open source projects can be
subject to separation movements. Because no centralized authority
decides the direction of development, open source projects are
more prone to cliques of developers that develop their own belief
system regarding certain aspects of the development process. For
instance, the strong belief by some developers in product design
features that resulted in the separation of the Berkeley Unix
program and Sendmail during the late 1980s.
Perhaps if the open source movement had an optimally
incentivized democratic decision-making tool, such separation of
interests and development would become less likely. If the voting
constituents in an open source movement knew that their decisions
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
as a whole are driven by optimal incentives for each voter to find
the truth, they are more likely to accept the outcome of a given
vote. The emerging decentralization technology has enabled a
debate on the feasibility of such a voting tool. Early research
suggests that it is theoretically feasible.18
The usability of open source products is often underdeveloped and
support and testing are often less evolved and not as readily
available in open source projects. Because open source software is
often the product of experts in their respective fields, open source
software and products are often geared towards the expert users
who are typically able to get access to the code and add value
themselves quickly. Because of the expert nature of open source
contributions, contributors are generally more interested in their
actual work product, e.g. code, rather than explaining it to other
users by way of documentation and testing. The lack of
documentation in open source projects can partially be explained
by the community driven effort to eliminating bugs. Yet, the
average developer and consumer typically require more support
through user-friendly interfaces, backwards compatibility and
comprehensive and easily accessible documentation. Simply
adding comments in the source code, as often practiced in open
source projects, may simply not be sufficient. Recognizing the
need to upgrade documentation and testing, some larger open
source projects, including most notably Linux19 and Mozilla,20
have started to make developer documentation web pages
available to the community. Testing strategies for open source
projects are still largely restricted to the insiders of a given
projects’ developer community.
Software patents have emerged as a challenge to the open source
development process in the early 2000s. A litany of patents and
18 For a summary that illustrates the possible opportunities of blockchain-based
governance instantiations see: Kaal, Wulf (Aug. 23, 2019). Blockchain-Based
Corporate Governance [Research Paper]. Max Planck Institute Luxembourg for
Procedural Law (Dec. 2019),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3441904.
19 The Linux Documentation Project, www.tldp.org (accessed June 1, 2020).
20 MDN Web Docs, developer.mozilla.org (accessed June 1, 2020).
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
patent litigation emerged in the early 2000s and undermined the
open source development process. Since the early 2000s, the ideas
imbodied in code were subjected by the courts to enhanced legal
protections. Patent litigation initiated by the SCO Group in early
2003 presented the first wave of patent enforcements. After its
acquisition from Novell, the SCO Group held at least partial rights
to UNIX and began to enforce these patents against among others:
Novell, IBM, DaimlerChrysler.
As a result of the litigation and its aftermath, it became much
easier to obtain patents, even for more common ideas that
previously would not have been protected. For example, almost
300 patents can potentially be used against the Linux kernel
alone.21 The level of innovation was high in the software industry
in the early 2000s, when the courts increased the patentability of
software. What makes things worse, courts decided to increase the
protections for software despite lacking proof that additional
patentability of software would increase the level of innovation.
As a result, corporations began filing and acquiring thousands of
software patents that enabled them to strategically undermine
competitor projects.
As a result of the accelerating patentability of open source
solutions, developers increasingly fear they could inadvertently
infringe patents during the open source development process. In
turn, developers often lack the knowledge and skills to make the
determination as to whether their open source contributions may
infringe existing software patents. Exacerbating the problem, in
2004, Linux contributors became subject to mandatory attestation
requirements as to their respective rights to make an open source
21 See Google Search,
https://www.google.com/search?sxsrf=ALeKk03NEi4O4C0iVEBpc3U_vkN-
S4UPAQ%3A1591062869345&ei=VbHVXuLRFNeUtAbqzK2oBA&q=300+p
atents+Linux+kernel&oq=300+patents+Linux+kernel&gs_lcp=CgZwc3ktYWI
QAzoECAAQR1DerwFYhc8BYOzPAWgAcAJ4AIABWYgBsgGSAQEymAE
AoAEBqgEHZ3dzLXdpeg&sclient=psy-ab&ved=0ahUKEwii0JGJg-
LpAhVXCs0KHWpmC0UQ4dUDCAw&uact=5.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
contribution to Linux.22 The combination of these factors inhibits
the open source development process.
The increased patentability of code also raises an incentive
problem for developers. It is questionable if developers are
sufficiently incentivized to contribute to an open source project if
they could join a traditional closed project. Similarly, the concern
that increased patentability of scientific output will limit research
is discussed in the literature under the label of the ‘‘anti-
commons’’ problem.23
5. Level of Decentralization
The level of decentralization in the developer community of
individual open source projects provides an early indicator as to
how much trends in the open source movement can foreshadow
the decentralization movement. The level of decentralization here
is defined by how homogeneous the developer community is in a
given open source project. Depending on the open source project,
the level of decentralization may differ significantly.
The degree of decentralization in open source communities and
projects is dictated by the degree of hierarchies in the governance
of a given project. Some open source communities may have an
entirely flat hierarchy among developers. This would typically
mean that all developers are on the same level and there are no
power disparities between individual developers. Decisions are
made based on unanimity or some form of consensus. In this flat
hierarchical governance structure, the degree of decentralization is
highest because no power disparities exist between developers.
22 Sailer, Reiner, Jaeger, Trent, Zhang, Xiaolan, & van Doorn, Leendert (2004).
Attestation-based Policy Enforcement for Remote Access [Research Paper]
from CCS'04, Oct 25-29, 2004, Washington, DC.,
http://www.cse.psu.edu/~trj1/papers/ccs04.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
23 Heller, Michael A. & Eisenberg, Rebecca S. (May 1, 1998). Can Patents
Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical Research. Science
Magazine, 280, 698-701.
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
The open source development community is not immune to
centralization. Humans have a natural inclination to use
knowledge and resources to exert power over others. In more
centralized open source projects, a hierarchical differentiation may
exist between contributing developers. In the existing hierarchical
structure among open source projects, developers may be invited
to join the ranks of core developers after demonstrating their value
to the other project contributors and, thus, earning their respect. As
core developers, they may have enhanced power over the
governance structure and enhanced access right to the code, e.g.
the right to incorporate their modification into the code base. This
is of course a two-way street in the sense that developers may also
be demoted to -co-developer etc. if they cannot maintain their
reputation or are subject to personality clashes etc.
Hierarchies among developers in a given open source project bring
with them a more centralized power structure. In such open source
projects, the core developers have typically more power than
ordinary codevelopers. Some open source projects, such as
Apache, have instituted multiple levels of developers. Such
projects may therefore be deemed more centralized. This power
disparity manifests itself in executive decision making. Here, core
developers with high levels of power may have increased voting
rights on product development of strategic implementation and
overall project strategy. Centralization here connotes the degree of
influence a given developer at a certain rank may have in the
governance of the project.
The meritocracy of open source projects may be seen as justifying
and / or offsetting centralization of power in a given open source
project. Contributors’ knowledge and quality of output (e.g. work
products and code demonstrated by a given contribution,) is used
to determine a contributors’ perceived merit. The respective level
of perceived merit of a given contributor, in turn, leads to power.
The community of contributors may find it justifiable to allocate a
higher rank to a developer who solved a very significant problem
for the project as a core developer.
Allocating a higher degree of power to a given developer based on
perceived merit can often turn out to be a fallacy. While the merit
of a given contributor and its transference to power may depend
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
on a given project’s organizational structure, timing and the
obstacles that had to be overcome may often play a role in the
allocation of power. For instance, a one-off contribution at the
beginning of a project may not mean that the respective developer
continues to maintain the required expertise and merit to
continually justify the higher rank. In other words, deflation is not
built into the perception of merit and free riding is possible.
V. Technological Precursors of Decentralization
We can learn from history. The modalities of historical increases
in society’s network capabilities provide a precedent for the
evolution of decentralization. The technologies and technological
trends that enabled the increases in telecommunications, internet
proliferation, e-commerce, the digital transformation of society,
social media, and the internet of things, among several others,
have inaugurated unprecedented societal network capability.
These technologies and trends also opened the gateway for a
deeper structural reform of society. Heightened network capability
of society is in many ways just a precursor to a more
fundamentally networked societal structure. Just as social media
groups are created regardless of ethnical origin, race, citizenship
or creed, networks in society can cooperate and co-create at an
unprecedented level. Such cooperation and co-creation are already
possible with centralized internet structures based on existing
technologies. Take for instance the creation of Wikipedia and the
volunteerism that makes it strong and growing every day.
Volunteers co-create content and information for the greater good
of society. The structural reforms emanating from existing
technologies are often described as globalization. Yet, the term
globalization insufficiently describes the social structures and
network capability created by the technologies.
1. From Disruptive Fintech to Decentralized Finance (DeFi)
The digital transformation of business enabled disruptive
innovation and change. Startups have capitalized on the customer-
experience- aspects of the digital transformation of their business
and created peer-to-peer disruptive business solutions. The
disruptive change coming from customer-focused technological
innovation is often directly linked to the emergence of fintech. The
innovation of financial services via technology has created
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
systems that are faster, cheaper and more convenient for the
consumer.
The disruptive peer-to-peer features of fintech epitomize the core
principles of decentralization. Fintech brings information closer to
the edge and serves the consumers, it disrupts centralized
structures in finance and forces the disrupted financial
conglomerates to serve the consumer better. As such, Fintech is
precursor of future disruption generated by decentralized
technologies.
Decentralized Finance (DeFi) is an extension of the customer-
experience-focused digital transformation that was enabled by the
proliferation of fintech. As an emerging movement in 2019, DeFi
attempts to apply decentralized technology solutions to further
disrupt financial services. The particular form of disruption in
DeFi comes from its attempts to make financial transactions
permissionless, completely open to anybody, and borderless.
Through the use of blockchain technology and its progeny, DeFi
promises to empower its customers with reduced transaction costs,
broader financial inclusion, and open access across borders. The
disruption through DeFi may be mitigated by existing financial
institutions’ attempts to leverage decentralized technologies in a
controlled environment that allows the utilization of its benefits,
such as transparency and interoperability, while also facilitating
centralized oversight.
2. Digital Transformation as a Pathway to Decentralization
The digital transformation of business enabled for the first time in
history a form of decentralized production at lower cost. With the
digital representation of content, centralized production was less
needed, e.g. printing presses and other forms of material
representation of content became redundant for certain businesses,
and decentralized content production became significantly less
expensive. Digitization has enabled decentralized production
because content could be more easily accessed and produced with
fewer resources regardless of location. Content could come for the
first time from the edges of the system rather than through
centralized production mechanics. And, content could be more
easily distributed and shared with fewer points of control and
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
oversight. At the same time, per unit costs of goods and services
can be lowered and overall transaction cost depreciated.
The same factors that enabled and accelerated the digital
transformation of business also help facilitate and extend
decentralization. Digitization of content in combination with the
proliferation of the internet and increasing online access via
smartphones has motivated many businesses to consider new
digitally-fueled revenue producing product lines to stay
competitive. Cloud computing has further extended the digital
transformation at the enterprise level by facilitating the, often real-
time, interaction between individuals and between businesses.
Machine learning, IoT, and analytics in combination with
blockchain technology and AI enable the digital transformation at
the speed of the customer experience. With the increasing
influence of the customer experience on the digital transformation,
decentralized business opportunities are proliferating.
Tokenization of assets is a natural part of technology-enabled
decentralization. The tokenization of assets refers to the process of
issuing a digital asset that forms the digital representation of an
existing real-world asset. Similar to the process of securitization,
where financial institutions pool illiquid real-world securities to
form newly created securities that convert into cash and can be
traded, tokenization takes liquid or illiquid real-world assets and
converts them into digital assets or tokens that can be traded on
secondary markets.
The digitization of content was a natural precursor of tokenization
via decentralized technology. The digitization of content was a
natural precursor to the internet of things and its progeny. The
proliferation of digital services in the internet of things, in turn,
required a certain depth of digitalization to work with other
technologies and to create new business assets. Tokenization of
assets via decentralized technology can therefore be seen as the
extension of digitalization. Tokenization of existing assets, for
instance, tokenized real estate is the instantiation of a fractural part
of the respective piece of real estate as a whole, requires a certain
depth of decentralized infrastructure solutions.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
3. From IoT to Decentralized Web (Web 3.0)
Internet-based platform businesses have been proliferating since
the dot.com boom in the late 1990’s. Internet-based platform
services are so successful because their peer-to-peer capabilities
make them compelling, efficient, and attractive in a fast-changing
world, leading people to place their trust in new businesses and
brands. Search algorithms, data analytics, and improvements in
usability have increased trust in consumers by minimizing bad
experiences, maximizing great experiences, and avoiding
unwanted issues. With the increasing availability of big data, deep
learning, machine learning, sensors and sensor data, such
technology-driven evolution of internet-based platform businesses
can be expected to expand exponentially.
The IoT proliferation is offset by diminished consumer
confidence. By the year 2020 the majority of experts estimate that
a total of 30 to 50 billion devices will connect to the internet.24
The sheer amount of devices creates unprecedented cyber security
issues.25 Cyber security attacks can now be launched by
unsophisticated parties at minimal cost with maximal potential for
damage. Cyber security attacks, in turn, are among the factors that
help explain the declining consumer confidence on the internet.
Several studies have provided evidence on the acceleration of trust
issues in the internet around the globe.26 Trust issues in the United
States can clearly be distinguished in international comparison.27
The trust crisis is exacerbated by deficiencies in the internet
infrastructure. Since its inception, the internet has become a
24 Nordrum, Amy (Aug, 18, 2016). Popular Internet of Things Forecast of 50
billion Devices by 2020 is Outdated. IEEE: Spectrum,
https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-talk/telecom/internet/popular-internet-of-things-
forecast-of-50-billion-devices-by-2020-is-outdated (accessed June 1, 2020).
25 Reuters (Nov. 8, 2016). Tech Firms Struggle to Make Smart Devices Safer.
Fortune: Tech, https://fortune.com/2016/11/08/struggle-internet-of-things-
security/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
26 Edelman (Jan 21, 2018). 2018 Edelman Trust Barometer: Global Report,
https://www.edelman.com/research/2018-edelman-trust-barometer (accessed
June 1, 2020).
27 Ibid.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
network of vertically and horizontally integrated monopolies.
These monopolies create information silos and constrain
knowledge exchange. The resulting lack of competition impedes
innovation, including at the protocol level and diminished
consumer protection and rights. These deficiencies in today’s
internet age consistently and progressively undermine trust on the
web.
Consumer confidence and trust are becoming increasingly
digitized and automated. The traditional trust and cohesion
mechanisms have reached their limits. Slow and expensive
experiences have resulted in greater distrust in established
institutions and their products and services. The old-world focus
on more regulations, processes, and procedures is being replaced
by new forms of trust. People are much less trusting of
organizations or procedures, but instead trust machines and
algorithms and the underlying code. Trust has started to become
digitized and automated. Humans trust machines on the internet to
store and process information and to transact with each other and
with machines.
Peoples’ increasing reliance on digitized, coded, and automated
replacements of traditional cohesion mechanisms may be
misplaced. The existing internet is designed for hierarchical
societal structures and with an underlying authoritative and
hierarchical trust model. Many inefficiencies are associated with
the traditional hierarchical trust model including serious cyber
security vulnerabilities.
Decentralized technology solutions may soon be able to replace
existing technology on the internet. For example, startups have
been experimenting with decentralized authentication engines to
verify fake news, among other applications. Such decentralized
technology solutions may soon be able to verify the trust humans
place in machines and enable a more trusting environment for
internet-based transactions. While society is not yet convinced
that distributed or decentralized peer-to-peer networks can deliver
enhanced digitized trust, the experimentation with decentralized
solutions has started to personalize and humanize digital trust.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
4. From Social Media to Decentralized Coordination
Social media transfers knowledge from the edges of society into
the mainstream. Social media allows people who hold otherwise
marginalized or underappreciated views to meet kindred spirits
online and form groups that promote their shared ideas. When
these newly formed social networks grow they can increase their
influence incrementally and promote their perspectives until they
become more mainstream. Otherwise invisible social, ethical,
environmental, political issues can thus gain traction rather
quickly. Increased visibility of these issues can transfer the
balance of power on these issues from the hands of a few to the
mainstream of the masses.
The increased network capability of society that is promoted by
social media can change and improve the coordination of human
behavior in society. Social media data and metrics can replace
centralized coordination of human behavior. For example, social
media posts often identify emergency information more accurately
and more timely than centralized media reports. Similarly, for
groups that coordinate their conduct, as for example in the Arab
Spring and other reform movements, coordination via social media
is not merely relegated to information exchange, but can actually
coordinate protest movements. In the product context, social
media conduct of groups as they relate to products becomes a very
powerful placement and marketing device. Product specific or
content specific conduct on social media can become a form of
‘social proof’ for such products or services.28 However, because
the incentive design for social proof is suboptimal, the social
media coordination function is still largely flawed.
Decentralized technology solutions can tap into the coordination
function that was inaugurated by social media and improve it.
Social media allows the enhanced coordination of information that
was previously allocated on the edges of society. Because social
networks feed off interactions among people, they become more
powerful as they grow. Decentralized technology enables the
decentralized coordination of powerfully growing social media
networks and channel the information and interaction of people.
Governing decentralized information flow necessitates
28 See Chapter 3, footnote 6.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
decentralized incentive designs. Startups have started to
experiment with decentralized technology solutions that tap into
the information coordination function facilitated by social media.
5. Cloud Computing as Inertia for Decentralized Networks
Cloud computing introduced the idea of applying resources from
the edge of a system, to pool such resources, and to apply them for
a greater good. Cloud computing became a reality in 2002 with the
release of AWS by Amazon. However, it bears significant
similarities to the time sharing systems of the 1960s as
technologists and scientists explored ways to make large-scale
computing power available to broader groups of users. Later
expansion of these concepts involved experimentation with
algorithms that helped to prioritize CPUs and increase efficiency
for users. The experimentation helped optimize the cloud
computing platforms, their infrastructure and applications.
What social media has done for the connectivity between people,
cloud computing is doing for the connectivity of applications.
Cloud computing enabled existing networks to become integrated
into broader networks. Through cloud computing, applications
could be integrated seamlessly with each other. Increasingly, one-
to-one application integration processes are transformed via cloud
computing advances into mass enabled applications that can
connect with each other to exchange data and logic. Consumers
expect applications to be more connected and more versatile and
the applications with the most connectivity are becoming the most
effective and, thus, most popular.
Decentralized computing solutions can further extend the progress
of cloud computing by connecting the fragmented collective
knowledge that was created by cloud computing in silos. Cloud
computing has significantly increased connectivity in society and
business but at the same time contributed to the creation of
monolithic applications that solve a very specific problem for a
specific business / department / role. The fragmentation of data
and content is already creating problems for collaboration but also
for the search, organization, and discovery of data and content.
Companies need to find ways to address these problems born out
of cloud computing to stay competitive and thrive. Connecting the
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
collective knowledge that was created in silos is a fundamental
undertaking that may only truly be accomplished through
decentralized networks.
The interoperability of decentralized applications extends the
application networks facilitated by cloud computing. To further
extend network capability of technology solutions, applications
have to be able to integrate with each other regardless of their
technological and physical environments. Cloud computing
enables future decentralized solutions because it already allows
applications to talk to each other. Decentralized networks will
further extend the application integration facilitated by cloud
computing.
6. Peer-to-Peer Network Expansion
The future of peer-to-peer computing networks goes beyond
sharing of computing resources. Current nodes in decentralized
networks can share computing resources while doing rather similar
tasks. Yet, future peer-to-peer computing networks will thrive by
adding nodes to the network that contribute dissimilar resources
and capabilities to the decentralized community of nodes. The
dissimilarity of contributions allows the decentralized network to
thrive because they enable the network to perform tasks that go
beyond what individual peers can do by themselves. The network
makes those enhanced capabilities available to the totality of
nodes in the network, making it grow and proliferate in the process
as additional nodes are motivated to join the network to take
advantage of the additional capabilities.
Peer-to-peer network models increasingly spawn global
socioeconomic experiments and inspire new structures and
philosophies in many areas of human interaction. The success of
peer-to-peer networks was instrumental in accelerating the
transformation of legacy business models into peer-to-peer
network incentive models. Such models started to proliferate after
the emergence of the BitTorrent protocol in 2012. Peer-to-peer
network incentive models are often intended to lower distribution-
related costs because of direct negotiations between peers and the
associated optimizing feedback loops and decentralized value
flows.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
VI. The Need for Technology Infrastructure Upgrades
Technologies that enable the increased network capability of
society necessitate incremental infrastructure upgrades. Disruptive
and game-changing technologies of the past inaugurated
infrastructure upgrades that facilitated the expansion of the
technology and with it social and societal changes. For instance,
utilizing the technological potential of the steam engine and the
combustion engine during the industrial revolution required then
new infrastructure tools that improved connectivity in society.
Those improvements included copper wiring for electricity, light
bulbs, new laws, and institutions, among others. Similarly, the
digital transformation in the aftermath of the birth of
telecommunication, the internet, and digitization was inhibited
until the digital infrastructure was built, laws were updated, and
new institutions were created.
Decentralization benefits from the earlier technology infrastructure
upgrades. Decentralization of business and society requires
network technology. Advances in telecommunication, the internet
proliferation and the resulting e-commerce, the digital
transformation of society, social media, and the internet of things,
cloud computing and peer-to-peer networking, among several
others, increased the overall availability of network technology.
Network technology that enables increased network capability of
society, in turn, creates the necessary infrastructure for emerging
decentralization.
Decentralization requires its own infrastructure. The technologies
of the internet era and its progeny alone may not suffice. Fully
decentralized technologies require an enhanced decentralized
network infrastructure. For example, the emerging technological
decentralization by way of blockchain technology may require a
truly decentralized public blockchain. That is, a public blockchain
that is not subject to points of centralization and corruption, that is
fully secure at the level of proof of work security with a
transaction throughput of over one hundred thousand transactions
per seconds. Without such basic infrastructure products, on-chain
governance of blockchains may not be or may only limitedly be
possible. In turn, it is hard to imagine how decentralized
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
infrastructure solutions can emerge without on-chain governance
solutions.
The blockchain ecosystem may not be able to grow without a core
decentralized infrastructure. This may include a functioning public
blockchain that allows the community to build on and around with
extensions and application solutions. In 2019, the People Republic
of China has announced plans to issue their own centralized e-
cryptocurrency. While this is hardly a decentralized infrastructure
upgrade, it allows the blockchain community to develop
applications around a widely recognized state-sponsored
cryptocurrency. In the private sector, the introduction of
Facebooks centralized libra cryptocurrency seems to facilitate trust
into the technology and regulatory recognition which one day
could help jumpstart an application ecosystem around the libra
cryptocurrency.
Bibliography
Ballotpedia (2017). Local Government Responses to the Sharing
Economy (ridesharing/homesharing),
https://ballotpedia.org/Local_government_responses_to_the_sh
aring_economy_(ridesharing/homesharing) (accessed June 1,
2020).
Benkley, Yochai (2006). The Wealth of Networks: How Social
Production Transforms Markets and Freedom. Yale University
Press: New Haven.
Black Duck Software (April 15, 2015). 2015 Future of Open
Source Survey Results. Synopsis,
https://www.slideshare.net/blackducksoftware/2015-future-of-
open-source-survey-results (accessed June 1, 2020).
Capiluppi, Andrea, Lago, Patricia, & Morisio, Maurizio (April
2003). Characteristics of Open Source Projects [Conference
Paper]. Proceedings of the Euromicro Conference on Software
Maintenance and Reengineering,
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/4010991_Characteris
tics_of_open_source_projects [PDF Available].
Carr, Clare (Apr. 13, 2015). The Data Behind the Average Article
Lifespan. Parse.ly, https://blog.parse.ly/post/1768/data-on-
article-lifespans/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Chaffey, Dave (Nov. 11, 2019). Mobile Marketing Statistics
Compilation. Smart Insights,
https://www.smartinsights.com/mobile-marketing/mobile-
marketing-analytics/mobile-marketing-statistics/ (accessed
June 1, 2020).
Chapman, Lizette, Eidelson, Josh, Cutler, Joyce E. & Bloomberg
(Sept. 11, 2019). New Labor Bill Passed by California Senate
Would Transform the Gig Economy -- And Could Cost Uber
$500 Million a Year. Fortune: Tech,
https://fortune.com/2019/09/11/gig-economy-california-senate-
uber-law-labor-rights-union/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Code, code.gov (accessed June 1, 2020).
Debian (Apr. 26, 2004). Debian Social Contract,
https://www.debian.org/social_contract#guidelines (accessed
June 1, 2020).
Edelman (Jan 21, 2018). 2018 Edelman Trust Barometer: Global
Report, https://www.edelman.com/research/2018-edelman-
trust-barometer (accessed June 1, 2020).
Feller, Joseph & Fitzgerald, Brian (2002). Understanding Open
Source Software Development. Addison-Wesley; UK.
Heller, Michael A. & Eisenberg, Rebecca S. (May 1, 1998). Can
Patents Deter Innovation? The Anticommons in Biomedical
Research. Science Magazine, 280, 698-701.
John Deere, https://www.deere.com/en/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Kaal, Wulf (Aug. 23, 2019). Blockchain-Based Corporate
Governance [Research Paper]. Max Planck Institute
Luxembourg for Procedural Law (Dec. 2019),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139
/ssrn.3441904
Krishnamurthy, Sandeep (April 2002). Cave or Community? An
Emprirical Examination of 100 Mature Open Source Projects.
First Monday,
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220167093_Cave_or
_Community_An_Empirical_Examination_of_100_Mature_O
pen_Source_Projects [PDF Available].
Marsden, Dr. Paul (2012). The Social Commerce Handbook.
Blacklick: McGraw-Hill Publishing.
MDN Web Docs, developer.mozilla.org (accessed June 1, 2020).
Netcraft (April 15, 2010). April 2010 Web Server Survey,
https://news.netcraft.com/archives/2010/04/15/april_2010_web
_server_survey.html (accessed June 1, 2020).
Nordrum, Amy (Aug, 18, 2016). Popular Internet of Things
Forecast of 50 billion Devices by 2020 is Outdated. IEEE:
Spectrum, https://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-
talk/telecom/internet/popular-internet-of-things-forecast-of-50-
billion-devices-by-2020-is-outdated (accessed June 1, 2020);
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

DECENTRALIZATION – WHY WE NEED TECHNOLOGY INFRASTRUCTURE UPGRADES
Reuters (Nov. 8, 2016). Tech Firms Struggle to Make Smart
Decices Safer. Forture: Tech,
https://fortune.com/2016/11/08/struggle-internet-of-things-
security/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
Open Source Initiative (2007). The Open Source Definition
(Annotated), https://opensource.org/docs/definition.php
(accessed June 1, 2020).
Open Source Initiative (2007). The Open Source Definition,
https://opensource.org/docs/osd (accessed June 1, 2020).
Ritzau (May 18, 2018). In World First, AirBnB to Report Income
Directly to Danish Authorities. The Local dk,
https://www.thelocal.dk/20180518/in-world-first-airbnb-to-
report-income-directly-to-danish-authorities (accessed June 1,
2020).
RogueWave Software (2017). 2017 Open Source Support Report:
Trends, Issues, and Surprises in OSS,
https://www.roguewave.com/sites/rw/files/documents/roguewa
ve-open-source-support-report2017-vf4-digital.pdf (accessed
June 1, 2020).
Sailer, Reiner, Jaeger, Trent, Zhang, Xiaolan, & van Doorn,
Leendert (2004). Attestation-based Policy Enforcement for
Remote Access [Research Paper] from CCS'04, Oct 25-29,
2004, Washington, DC.,
http://www.cse.psu.edu/~trj1/papers/ccs04.pdf (accessed June
1, 2020).
Seaman, Jeff & Tinti-Kane, Hester (Oct. 2013). Social Media for
Teaching and Learning. Pearson Learning Solutions and the
Babson Survey Research Group,
https://onlinelearningsurvey.com/reports/social-media-for-
teaching-and-learning-2013-report.pdf (accessed June 1, 2020).
Share Barcelona, https://share.barcelona/ (accessed June 1, 2020).
SourceForge, SourceForge.net (accessed June 1, 2020).
The Linux Documentation Project, www.tldp.org (accessed June
1, 2020).
Wang, Huaiqing & Wang, Chen (Mar/Apr. 2001). Open Source
Software Adoption: A Status Report. IEEE Software, 18:2, 90-
95.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3808859

