BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Wulf A. Kaal*
MAX PLANCK INSTITUTE LUXEMBOURG FOR PROCEDURAL LAW (Dec. 2019)
ABSTRACT
Corporations and other forms of business organizations can be
supplemented with blockchain-based agency constructs.
Blockchain-based decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs)
expand the definition of the firm. On-chain DAO governance
enables dynamic regulatory features that facilitate unprecedented
decentralized regulatory solutions.
Key Words: Corporate Governance, Decentralized Autonomous
Organization, Blockchain, Distributed Ledger Technology,
Regulation, Protocols, Optimization, Efficiency, Governance,
Dynamic Regulation, Principal-Agent, Emerging Technology,
Agency Cost, Monitoring, Feedback Effects
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
* © 2020 Wulf A. Kaal. Professor, University of Saint Thomas School of Law,
Minneapolis.
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................. 2
II. BUSINESS ORGANIZATION REVISITED ................................................. 7
1. Distinguishing Features of Decentralized Systems ......................... 7
2. Original 2016 DAO ....................................................................... 8
3. The Theory of the Firm Revisited ................................................... 9
III. GOVERNANCE SHORTCOMINGS IN DAOS ...................................... 11
1. Centralized Design Elements in the Original 2016 DAO .............. 12
2. Lack of Proper Incentivization ..................................................... 15
3. Lack of Default Rules .................................................................. 16
4. Lacking On-Chain Voting Mechanism ......................................... 18
5. Socially Optimal Forks ................................................................ 19
6. Decentralized Infrastructure Requirements .................................. 21
IV. DYNAMIC GOVERNANCE IN DECENTRALIZED SYSTEMS ................. 22
1. Shortcomings of Centralized Governance in Decentralized Systems
23
2. Benefits of Dynamic Decentralized Governance ........................... 27
V. OPTIMIZING DAO GOVERNANCE ...................................................... 29
1. Dynamic DAO Governance ......................................................... 30
2. Level of Decentralization............................................................. 32
3. Incentive Alignment ..................................................................... 33
4. On-Chain DAO Governance ........................................................ 34
5. Reputation-Based Governance .................................................... 38
VI. REFORMING CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ....................................... 40
VII. CONCLUSION ............................................................................... 43
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
I. Introduction
Corporate governance is characterized by agency constructs. The
agency relationship in modern finance and corporate governance is
characterized by attempts to optimize incentives between principals
and agents, control costs, minimize information asymmetries,
control adverse selection and moral hazard, optimize risk
preferences between principals and agents, and engage in
monitoring. The Corporate form remains the most popular form of
a governance mechanism, Despite the unresolved substantive
agency problems associated with the division of ownership
(shareholders) and control (agent), 1 and the incomplete and
suboptimal rules that govern such conflicts.
Shareholder value maximization has emerged as the dominant
corporate governance solution for the agency problems.2 To reduce
the risk of managerial misbehavior and the associated agency
problems,3 alignment of the interests of the stakeholders within
those of the investor-shareholders has become the dominant
1 Mark J. Roe, The Inevitable Instability of American Corporate Governance, in
RESTORING TRUST IN AMERICAN BUSINESS 9 (American Academy of Arts and
Sciences eds., 2004, MIT Press 2005). (“The core fissure in American corporate
governance is the separation of ownership from control—distant and diffuse
stockholders, with concentrated management—a separation that creates both
great efficiencies and recurring breakdowns.”).
2 According to the dominant view, the goal of a firm should be to increase the
financial interests of the investors and by doing so the firm can maximize
opportunities to be successful. Stephen M. Bainbridge, Director v. Shareholder
Primacy in the Convergence Debate, 16 TRANSNAT’L LAW. 45 (2002), available
at https://scholarlycommons.pacific.edu/globe/vol16/iss1/5; Mike Marin, The
Crisis of Shareholder Primacy, UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE: RESEARCH AT
CAMBRIDGE (Mar. 19, 2012), http://www.cam.ac.uk/research/discussion/the-
crisis-of-shareholder-primacy; H. Jeff Smith, The Shareholders vs. Stakeholders
Debate, 44 MITSLOAN MGMT REV. no. 4, July 2003, at 85,
http://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/the-shareholders-vs-stakeholders-debate/;
Lynn A. Stout, The Shareholder Value Myth, (Cornell Law Faculty
Publications, Paper No. 771, 2013),
http://scholarship.law.cornell.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2311&context=fa
cpub.
3 Alessio M. Pacces, RETHINKING CORPORATE GOVERNANCE: THE LAW AND
ECONOMICS OF CONTROL POWERS (2013).
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

implementation of the shareholder primacy doctrine.4 The doctrine
suggests that by aligning the interests and incentives of the various
actors with those of the investor-shareholders all of the stakeholders
in a firm and the public benefit.5 Following this logic, increasing
shareholder control over other actors within the firm has become
the primary goal of corporate governance rules.6 The correct
corporate governance is seen as naturally resulting in shareholder
value.7
The existing corporate governance attempts for inevitable agency
problems fall short of accomplishing the needed governance quality
and stability. In an effort to curtail the inevitable instability that is a
by-product of the pervasive agency problem in the corporate
governance system,8 governments have responded to corporate
governance scandals by adopting a number of regulatory changes.
Such changes include substantively increased disclosure
requirements.9 Shareholder activism reform by itself has been
unable to sufficiently improve the corporate governance system.10
4 N. Craig Smith & David Ronnergard, Shareholder Primacy, Corporate Social
Responsibility, and the Role of Business Schools, 134 J. BUS. ETHICS 463 (2016).
5 Stout, supra note 2 (Discussing residual claimants arguments and potential
benefits to society through the company); see also Smith, supra note 2.
6 Justin Fox & Jay W. Lorsch, What Good Are Shareholders, HARV. BUS. REV.
Jul.-Aug. 2012, at 48, https://hbr.org/2012/07/what-good-are-shareholders.
7 Id.; Margaret M. Blair, Shareholder Value, Corporate Governance, and
Corporate Performance: A Post- Enron Reassessment of the Conventional
Wisdom, in CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND CAPITAL FLOWS IN A GLOBAL
ECONOMY 74, 53-82 (P.K. Cornelius & B. Kogut eds., Oxford University Press
2003).
8Roe, The Inevitable Instability of American Corporate Governance, supra note
1.
9 Benjamin E. Hermalin & Michael S. Weisbach, Transparency and Corporate
Governance (Nat’l Bureau of Econ. Research, Working Paper No. w12875,
2007), https://ssrn.com/abstract=958628.
10 Stephen M. Bainbridge, Shareholder Activism and Institutional Investors
(UCLA Sch. of Law Pub. Law-Econ. Research, Working Paper No. 05-
20, 2005), https://ssrn.com/abstract=796227; Jonathan M. Karpoff, The Impact
of Shareholder Activism on Target Companies: A Survey of Empirical Findings
(2001), https://ssrn.com/abstract=885365 (“[T]he disagreement among
researchers is more apparent than real. Most evidence indicates that shareholder
activism can prompt small changes in target firms’ governance structures, but has
negligible impacts on share values and earnings.”); Roberta Romano, Less Is
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Upgrading the U.S. proxy system has been another government
priority.11 Changes in executive compensation has been another
approach to address the instability of the existing corporate
governance system. 12 Government-sponsored organizational
experimentation that enables new business models and new
organizational structures is desirable and valuable and may be one
of the few ways to facilitate the much needed corporate governance
reform.13
Despite decades of governance experiments and extensive rule
revisions, the existing scope of agency problems suggest that the
core underlying agency problems cannot fully be resolved within
the existing theoretical and legal infrastructure.
Blockchain-based technology has started to offer alternatives to the
existing corporate governance solutions. Blockchain technology
More: Making Shareholder Activism A Valued Mechanism Of Corporate
Governance (Yale Law & Econ., Research Paper No. 241; Yale ICF, Working
Paper No. 00-10; Yale SOM, Working Paper No. ICF- 00- 10, 2000),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=218650 (“The finance literature presents an apparent
paradox: Notwithstanding commentators' generally positive assessment of the
development of such shareholder activism, the empirical studies suggest that it
has an insignificant effect on targeted firms' performance. Very few find evidence
of a positive impact, and some even find a significant negative stock price effect
from activism.”); John C. Coffee Jr., Liquidity Versus Control: The Institutional
Investor as Corporate Monitor, 91 COLUM. L. REV. 1277 (1991).
11 The existing U.S. proxy system lacks transparency; has few accountability
mechanisms; is complex and costly; tolerates record-keeping inaccuracies
partially because it provides no audit trail; and produces voting results that cannot
be verified. John C. Wilcox, Shareholder Nominations of Corporate Directors:
Unintended Consequences and the Case for Reform of the u.S. Proxy System, in
SHAREHOLDER ACCESS TO THE CORPORATE BALLOT (Lucian Bebchuck, ed.,
2004); Henry T. C. Hu & Bernard S. Black, The New Vote Buying: Empty Voting
and Hidden (Morphable) Ownership, 79 S. CALIF. L. REV. 811, 811 (2006);
David Yermack, Shareholder Voting and Corporate Governance, 2 ANN. REV.
FIN. ECON. 103 (2010).
12 Lucian A. Bebchuk & Jesse M. Fried, Executive Compensation as an Agency
Problem, 17 J. ECON. PERSP. 71 (2003); Lucian A. Bebchuk et al., The Wages of
Failure: Executive Compensation at Bear Stearns and Lehman 2000-2008, 27
YALE J. ON REG. 257 (2010).
13 Bengt R. Holmström & Steven N. Kaplan, The State of U.S. Corporate
Governance: What's Right and What's Wrong? (ECGI – Fin., Working Paper No.
23/2003, 2003), https://ssrn.com/abstract=441100.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

can facilitate the removal of agents as intermediaries in corporate
governance through code, peer-to-peer connectivity, crowds, and
collaboration. Blockchain-based guarantees embedded in
blockchain code can help ensure that no participant in business
transactions and agency relationships can circumvent the set of
governance rules. Blockchain guarantees include contract execution
between principal and agent only if and when all contract
parameters were fulfilled by both parties and verified in a consensus
algorithm. Hence, in the blockchain infrastructure, a lower level of
oversight and monitoring of agents changes the cost structure of the
principal agent relationship.
Smart contracts enabled by blockchain technology allow for the
comprehensive, near error free, and zero transaction/agency cost
coordination of agency relationships. Smart contracts and smart
property are blockchain enabled computer protocols that facilitate,
verify, monitor, and enforce the negotiation and performance of a
contract between principal and agent. Agency relationships in smart
contracts run exactly as coded without any possibility of
opportunistic behavior of the agent. All contractual terms are public
and fully transparent. Accordingly, a company’s finances, for
instance, are visible on the blockchain to anyone, not just to the
company’s accounting department. Smart agency contracts run on
a custom built blockchain, that enables principals and agents to
store registries of debts or promises, create entire markets, among
many other aspects that have not yet been considered.
Blockchain-cased legal constructs, known as decentralized
autonomous organizations (DAOs), have started to challenge the
core believe that governance necessitates agency. The first DAO,
launched in May 2016, in the founders’ attempt to set up a
corporate-type organization without using a conventional corporate
structure, had a governance structure that was entirely built on
software, code, and smart contracts that ran on the public
decentralized blockchain platform Ethereum.14 Because it was pure
computer code it had no physical address, no jurisdiction that could
14 Christoph Jentzsch, Decentralized Autonomous Organization to Automate
Governance 2 (unpublished manuscript) (on file at
https://download.slock.it/public/DAO/WhitePaper.pdf).
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
claim jurisdiction/control over it, and it was not an organization
with a traditional corporate hierarchy. The DAO did not use a
traditional corporate structure that necessitated formal authority and
empowerment flowing top down from investors/shareholders
through a board of directors to management and eventually staff.
Indeed, it had no directors, managers or employees. In essence, all
the core control mechanisms typically employed by principals in
agency relationships were entirely removed in the DAO.
For purposes of this article, the DAO is a group of anonymized
individuals who decide to follow a certain protocol. For instance,
the Uber DAO can be seen as Uber the company with all its
constituents except without the company, e.g., the entity, itself and
its hierarchical governance structures. If Uber were a DAO, the
Uber drivers as a group with their respective non-fungible token
holdings would become Uber, e.g., a fully decentralized company
without hierarchies. The control and power over the Uber DAO
would be in the hands of the DAO Uber token holders. Yet, the
staking mechanisms for non-fungible tokens in emerging DAO
protocols make the voting structure different than any previous
attempts at creating liquid democracies.
DAOs are by no means mainstream and are subject to a significant
emerging development process. Because the blockchain industry is
still in its infancy and core decentralized infrastructure elements
will remain lacking for the foreseeable future, DAOs are less likely
to disrupt existing corporate structures and the associated
governance solutions in the foreseeable future. However, DAOs
have the potential to create significant decentralized equivalents of
corporate structures. Such development is contingent on workable
governance solutions for DAOs. Without DAO governance, their
evolution is even less certain. The blockchain industry has started
to recognize the need for DAO infrastructure and governance
solutions. Yet, such governance solutions are still largely lacking,
even in the developmental phases.
Blockchain-based corporate governance solutions in DAOs require
evolutionary blockchain governance protocols. Existing blockchain
governance still mainly consist of forking a given chain. Even
attempts to create socially optimal chain forking rules cannot
suffice. Blockchain-based coded guarantees will evolve and require
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

protocol upgrades for that changing environment. Without
evolutionary governance upgrades the cost reduction for the agency
relationship cannot be maintained.
II. Business Organization Revisited
Blockchain-based corporate governance only limitedly works in
traditional corporate forms. While several US states, including the
state of Delaware, have started to evaluate the use of blockchain-
based technology for their proxy systems and for the transfer of
stock ownership, among other benefits, the traditional centralized
forms of limited liability entities can only partially benefit from the
decentralized governance offered by blockchain technology.
Blockchain-based corporate governance offers dynamic regulatory
features that are partially incompatible with the rule-based
traditional legal environment that traditional limited liability
entities are required to comply with.
1. Distinguishing Features of Decentralized Systems
Existing decentralized systems display several core commonalities
that affect commerce and society. Decentralized systems do not
have a central intelligence or leadership system based on traditional
hierarchies. Instead, the intelligence is spread throughout the
system. Information and knowledge naturally filter in at the edges
of the system, closer to where the action is and where most real-
time information is created. Decentralized systems can also very
easily mutate and change because the information flow is optimized
through dynamic feedback effects. As a result, such systems
become more attack resistant on multiple levels. In turn, the ability
to mutate quickly allows the decentralized systems to grow
incredibly quickly.
DAOs can be more efficient than hierarchical organizations and
their governance. In a hierarchical organization power is organized
in a hierarchical tree structure by necessity. Governance in a
hierarchical organization follows the tree structure and supplements
the power structure further with agency constructs. By contrast, in
a DAO, ideally each member is given autonomous power. The
power distribution in DAOs enables greater flexibility and
enhanced options for efficiency using the decentralized power
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
structure of interacting domains of expertise. DAOs can be more
productive in comparison with hierarchical organizations because
the information allocation and feedback effects allow them to
distribute the optimal amount of power to the optimal talent at the
optimal point in time. The successful implementation of such
dynamic power organization requires a decentralized governance
structure that motivates DAO token holders to collaborate
productively, by fairly rewarding development, work, and the
policing of any diminishments.15
2. Original 2016 DAO
The original 2016 DAO had many original features that
distinguished it from traditional forms of business organization.
During the DAO crowdfunding campaign in May 2016, investors
could become DAO constituents by purchasing DAO Tokens.16 The
DAO raised more than $168 million from approximately 10,000
“investors” and was considered the largest crowdfunding campaign
in its days. The original 2016 DAO, in the founders’ attempt to set
up a corporate-type organization without using a conventional
corporate structure. The founders’ central idea was that the wisdom
of the crowd would lead to smarter and more game-changing
investment decisions.17 The original 2016 DAO had to operate as a
kind of venture capital fund managed directly by the token
holders.18 The DAO governance structure was built on software,
code and smart contracts that ran on the public decentralized
blockchain platform Ethereum.19 The original 2016 DAO did not
have a physical address as it was merely computer code. And it was
not an organization with a traditional hierarchy as we know it from
traditional corporate structures where authority and empowerment
15 Craig Calcaterra, On-Chain Governance of Decentralized Autonomous
Organizations: Blockchain Organization Using Semada (May 24, 2018)
(unpublished manuscript) (on file at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3188374).
16 Carla L. Reyes, Nizan Geslevich Packin, & Ben Edwards, Distributed
Governance, 59 WM. & MARY L. REV. ONLINE (2018),
https://scholarship.law.wm.edu/wmlronline/vol59/iss1/1/.
17 Id.
18 Reyes et al., supra note 16.
19 Jentzsch, supra note 14.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

flow downwards from investors/shareholders through a board of
directors to management and eventually staff.20 Indeed, it had no
directors, managers or employees. Because a series of smart
contracts granted original 2016 DAO token holders voting rights,
the blockchain-based smart contracts imitated the role of articles of
association or bylaws. Because the DAO code was open source, the
token holders would not only vote on “investment proposals”, but
also on any change made to the code.21 Accepted proposals would
also be backed by a software code, defining the relationship (in
terms of rights, obligations and performance metrics) between the
DAO and the funded proposals.
The hack of the original 2016 DAO called the evolution of DAOs
as governance vehicles into question. Fundamental flaws in the
original 2016 DAO code enabled hackers to transfer one third of the
total funds to a subsidiary account that could not be controlled by
either the hacker or the original 2016 DAO members and
founders.22 The hack in combination with additional technological
limitations terminated the original 2016 DAO initiative.
In order for future generations of DAOs to operate successfully and
facilitate governance solutions, the outstanding legal issues need to
be addressed. While legal solutions are slowly emerging around the
world, it is still unclear whether DAOs would be subject to taxation,
what legal regime could govern the issuance of DAO tokens, and if
minority DAO token holders can be protected. It is also still unclear
if coded smart contracts that coordinate DAO member behavior are
legally binding in the existing legal infrastructure.
3. The Theory of the Firm Revisited
The various interpretations of the theory of the firm suggest that
firms exist to reduce transaction cost and as a response to the high
20 Id.
21 Id.
22 Ethereum press releases. www.ethereum.org (last visited [___]).
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
cost of using markets.23 Coase suggests the existence of the firm can
be explained by the incentives to internalize transactions in order to
free workers/collaborators from the need for external regulation.24
A well-defined task can easily be put out to the market, where a
contractor is paid a fixed sum for doing it. The firm is needed when
simple contracts of this kind will not suffice. Instead, an employee
agrees to follow varied and changing instructions, up to agreed
limits, for a fixed salary. Others define the existence of a firm as the
added efficiency of a centralized production-monitoring agency.25
Inexpensive open-source smart contracts eliminate a major
motivation for creating a firm under Ronald Coase’s transaction
cost theory.26 Coase posits the existence of the firm derives from
the incentive to internalize transactions in order to free
workers/collaborators from the need for external regulation, such as
costly contracts for minor engagements (e.g., coworkers sharing
office supplies).27 Smart contracts enable trustworthy transactions
of any size with minimal transactions cost and high levels of
transaction security. Barzel’s motivation for the existence of a firm,
the added efficiency of a centralized production-monitoring
agency,28 is also largely irrelevant with efficient smart contracting
as the smart contract performs the production-monitoring function
and largely removes agents.
DAOs challenge the various versions of the theory of the firm,
stretch the definition of a firm, and question the need for firms.
Existing experimentation with DAOs designs already violate
fundamental assumptions about firms, such as the hierarchical
organizational structure, the separation of firm members from
market members, the cultural or technical homogeneity of
members, and many other natural definitions for a firm.
23 Ronald Coase, The Nature of the Firm (1937).
http://www3.nccu.edu.tw/~jsfeng/CPEC11.pdf
24 Id.
25 Yoram Barzel, Economic Analysis of Property Rights (1997).
26 Coase, supra note 23.
27 Id.
28 Barzel, supra note 25.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

Decentralized transaction cost economics call into question the
theory of the firm. If the high costs of using markets, that legitimize
the existence of the firms, can be lowered ad infinitum, it becomes
questionable what the role of the firm can be. Peer-to-peer
transactions in DAOs, facilitated by trust through decentralized
consensus protocols and other emerging decentralized technology,
can significantly lower transaction costs. Monitoring costs and the
cost of agent supervision are largely superfluous in effective DAO
designs. Overall, emerging DAO designs can be expected to
continue to remove transactions cost. DAOs evolving design makes
them a more efficient business organization vehicle, especially
comparison with traditional firms.
Economy of scale advantages of centralized firms are challenged by
the evolving efficient DAO designs. Decentralized organizations
can be organized effectively to achieve greater economies of scale
and greater efficiency than traditional centralized firms. Existing
DAO designs only give an early glimpse of what may be
accomplished by future generations of DAOs. Future DAO
efficiency can be significantly increased through parameter
manipulations to DAO protocol development, security, stability,
recruitment and retention of members and outside business. With
such parameter upgrades, DAOs enable an eternal, reviewable
record of all members’ actions that can facilitate a decentralized
organization and achieve greater efficiency than traditional firms.
III. Governance Shortcomings in DAOs
Like any business organization governance design throughout
history, the evolving governance designs of DAOs is subject to
significant shortcomings. DAOs lack the centralized authority used
throughout history to organize society, guide individual and
organizational behavior, and enforce rules agreed upon by
constituents. From a centralized perspective, such lack of
organizational authority results in suboptimal governance outcomes
for DAOs. Yet, evolving DAO governance designs can offset
lacking centralized organizational authority with more efficient
decentralized organization.
DAOs require governance mechanisms when inevitable gaps arise
in the incomplete smart contracts of the firm. Corporate law’s core
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
role revolves around the supply of majoritarian default rules that fill
the gaps of parties’ necessarily incomplete contracts.29 Corporate
governance solutions in the existing legal infrastructure and
emerging coded governance solutions have a core common
denominator, they are both incomplete contracts. As such, neither
can anticipate all problems and eventualities that may arise in the
respective entities. Decentralized code-based systems are a nexus
of necessarily incomplete smart contracts. Unlike existing corporate
governance systems, however, the decentralized nexus of
incomplete smart contracts does not have a supply of majoritarian
default rules that could fill incomplete code-based smart contracts.
The default rules provided by corporate law are largely
incompatible because they are based on natural language, among
other incompatibility factors. Accordingly, blockchain-based
entities have a governance problem like all governance systems that
are based on incomplete contracts.
1. Centralized Design Elements in the Original 2016 DAO
The failure of the original 2016 DAO highlights the need for
sustainable decentralized governance solutions. The core
governance failure illustrated by the 2016 DAO is its failure to
create dynamic governance protocol upgrades in real-time through
dynamic feedback loops. When the flaws in the original 2016 DAO
code materialized, the DAO members were unable to evolutionarily
vote for a protocol governance upgrade. Their voting structure was
set up to vote on investment proposals, not on governance design.
Rather, the platform that hosted the 2016 DAO, had to vote on it,
which lead to a hardfork of the Ethereum blockchain. Because of its
systemic centralized infrastructure, the original 2016 DAO lacked a
dynamic governance mechanism that should have allowed its token
holders to vote for a change of the flawed code as its flaws
materialized.
The original 2016 DAO was subject to several, then necessary,
elements of centralization that undermined its ability to create
sustainable decentralized governance solutions. The points of
29 Dan Fischel & Frank Easterbrook, THE ECONOMIC STRUCTURE OF CORPORATE
LAW (1991).
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

centralization in the original 2016 included the use of centralized
decision makers, the voting structure, the payment structure, the
lack of staking, among several others.
The voting design in the original 2016 DAO introduced points of
centralization and corruption. The tokens of the original 2016 DAO
gave token holders ownership rights, voting rights, and property
rights. 30 These features are comparable to stock in traditional
corporations. Just as in the traditional voting stock of a corporation,
the original 2016 DAO token allowed its holders to vote on DAO
investment proposals. Token holders with more tokens held more
voting power than token holders with fewer tokens. Voting
proposals in the original 2016 DAO did not involve staking of any
non-fungible tokens towards a vote outcome. Nor had those voting
proposals a randomization element. All voting in the original 2016
DAO revolved around centralized voting power. As such, its voting
design introduced opportunities to corrupt the DAO and its
governance structure.
The governance structure of the original 2016 DAO relied on
centralized leadership in the form of “curators.”31 The 2016 original
DAO did not have an autonomous decentralized validation pool for
contractor proposals.32 The curators created and controlled the
whitelist of those preselected contractors that were authorized to
receive ether from the DAO. 33 Because the smart contract on its
own could not distinguish real from fake proposals, the curators had
approval power and vote prioritization power over contractor
proposals before the proposals were put up to a DAO community
vote. DAO token holders who had been selected as contractors
through a DAO member vote needed the curator’s verification that
the smart contract submitted by the token holder matched the public
smart contract on the Ethereum blockchain and that the contractor’s
30 Jentzsch, supra note 19 at 2.
31 Id.
32 The DAO founders attempted to turn this lack of decentralization and core
attack risk into a virtue by boasting that the existing curators consisted of an “all-
star group...of twelve of the brightest minds the Ethereum ecosystem has to
offer.”
33Id.
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
identity matched.34 The curator, thus, were the core point of
centralization in the original 2016 DAO design. Curators would
have become the control bottleneck of the original 2016 DAO as
they would have had control not over the contractor selection itself,
the DAO voted on that, but over the addition of project proposals
via smart contracts to the Ethereum blockchain.35
The payment structure for smart contract work proposals in the
original 2016 DAO introduced a point of centralization. Any
tokenholder in the original 2016 DAO was eligible to submit a
proposal via smart contract for a DAO vote to become a contractor
for the tokenholder community. Yet, the requirement to pay an ether
deposit that the tokenholder would forfeit if the proposal failed to
achieve the quorum requirement introduced a point of attack and
centralization. Fungible cryptocurrencies, such as ether, are by their
very nature a corruptive element. Decision makers can be
influenced by the power that derives from fungible currency. Power
can grow with the size of fungible cryptocurrency holdings.
Decentralized decision making necessitates non-fungible payouts
metrics combined with an indirect fungible payout structure.
Similarly, the payment structure for curators and contractors of the
original 2016 DAO created points of attack on the overall
governance structure of the original 2016 DAO. Any projects that
were approved by the original DAO token member community
would have required the contractor or curator to complete the
approved task in exchange for ether from the DAO. Direct
payments to the curator or contractor in a fungible cryptocurrency
create points of attack and corruption for the governance structure.
34 The DAO originators attempted to suspend this point of centralization in the
DAO design by introducing a debate period for the DAO community of at least
two weeks after a contractor was approved by a curator for the whitelist. During
the debate period, the DAO community was able to debate and vote on the
proposal. See id. Like so many other voting solutions of decentralized platforms
that proliferated in the aftermath of the original 2016 DAO, the original DAO
would also have been subject to voting participation issues. Staking and
inflationary token scoring, e.g. non-participation lowers proportional token score,
could have created incentives for vote participation.
35 The DAO white paper itself observed the limitation of decentralization in its
design as limiting the DAO to one curator would give that individual
“considerable power.” Id.
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

If curators’ and contractors’ payment come from a fungible
currency source without a direct or indirect penalty for
underperformance, such as lower token scores, DAO contractors
and workers may be corrupted by external sources. A non-fungible
form of payment with a penalty for underperformance would make
those corruptive elements less likely.
2. Lack of Proper Incentivization
Existing DAO governance design structures failed to take into
account the historical precedent on governance. Humanity has been
debating governance designs since the inception of human
organization.36 Common core denominators of existing problems
in governance design include the corruptive effects of existing
governance designs with fungible assets as well as identity of actors
in governance designs. These factors contributed to the resulting
inability to govern institutions effectively.
The lack of proper incentivization is a core common denominator
for all existing blockchain governance structures and especially on-
chain governance structures. The participants in any institution need
to be incentivized to improve their own utility while at the same
time benefiting the entirety of the institution for the long run.
Without that duality of incentivization, rational and opportunistic
internal and external constituents will attempt to game the
governance design.
Throughout history, when fungible assets are used as the dominant
incentive design in the governance of institutions with identifiable
actors, rational and opportunistic internal constituents and external
participants have attempted to corrupt the system. If the governance
and incentive alignment design via fungible assets allows for the
optimization of personal utility, people will continue to try to game
36 Institutional design and governance are a primary subject of study in law,
ethics, economics, political science, computer science, philosophy, sociology,
social psychology, cybernetics, control theory, among others. Entire school of
though, such as new institutional economics evolved because of the insufficiency
of governance solutions. See Popper, inra note 52.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
the governance design to maximize their personal utility at the
expense of the common good of the institution and its members.
Identity of actors in governance designs contributes to corruptive
elements. Throughout history, governance designs were created by
identifiable members of institutions for their fellow members.
Regulators and regulatees are usually able to identify each other
individually. In these identifiable circumstances for institutional
governance design, people have failed throughout history to
organize effectively. Corruption is possible if actors can be
identified. Every instantiation of institutional governance design
involving identifiable humans was afflicted by corruption sooner or
later.
3. Lack of Default Rules
Default rules provide flexibility and cheap legal solutions for
businesses. U.S. corporate law provides relatively few mandatory
rules.37 Rather, business association law provides default rules to
fill gaps in contractual associations.38 Such default rules create a
nexus of contracts that are available if and when needed.
Contracting parties can tailor the default rules. Parties do not have
to anticipate all eventualities that may arise in their relationship
because the default rules provide a nexus of contractual provisions
that are available if and when eventualities materialize. This creates
legal certainty and the associated economic benefits.
Blockchain-based smart contracting calls into question the
application of existing default rules. For business associations
organized via smart contracts on the blockchain, aka DAOs,
existing jurisdictional points of legal intervention are less clearly
established. 39 Default rules afforded by the existing legal system
are less likely to provide the established nexus of default contracts
for blockchain-based transactions. However, the architects,
37 Frank H. Easterbrook & Daniel R. Fischel, The Corporate Contract, 89
COLUM. L. REV. 1416, 1417 (1989).
38 Larry E. Ribstein, Why Corporations, 1 BERKELEY BUS. L. J. 183, 187-88
(2004).
39 Wulf Kaal & Craig Calcaterra, Crypto Transaction Dispute Resolution, 72 THE
BUSINESS LAWYER 109 (2017-2018).
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

designers, and coders of a given smart contract ecosystem can
affirmatively opt into the existing legal order through code. If and
how such opting-in would be legally enforceable in the existing
legal order or otherwise is less clear. The existing legal
infrastructure still relies heavily on natural language which is
antithetical to smart contracting.
The DAO created a type of business organization that exists
separate and apart from the existing legal order. DAOs are able to
create a decentralized nexus of smart contracts that exist on separate
nodes around the world with very limited points of centralization.
Well-designed DAOs are in the unique position to create very
sophisticated, autonomously, and evolutionarily morphing rules.40
These DAO rules go beyond any sets of traditionally conceived
business association default rules. Well-designed DAOs can create
oracles that allow the blockchain to interact with unvalidated data
sources.41 They can provide internal and external governance and
interaction with other DAOs, external blockchains, and centralized
entities. External governance includes the ability for other non-
native DAOs in a given blockchain to opt into the rules and
templates for rules provided by a given native DAO that established
over time the then optimal set of rules by way of precedent.42
Because of the decentralized, autonomous, and evolutionary nature
of the emerging DAOs, entity organization cannot be traced to any
particular individual. In other words, it is very difficult to imagine
40 Calcaterra, supra note 15.
41 Craig Calcaterra et al., Blockchain Infrastructure for Measuring Domain
Specific Reputation in Autonomous Decentralized and Anonymous Systems (U
of St. Thomas (Minnesota) Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-
11), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125822. (“An oracle for a blockchain is a
system that allows smart contracts to access real-world (i.e., off-chain) data.
Since the blockchain is an autonomous system with no centralized authority
dictating decisions, there is a need for a trusted 3rd party to reputably state the
results of real-world events. For instance, when blockchain users wish to
exchange a smart contract which mimics a stock option, they need agreement on
the value of the stock at the expiration date, which generally requires a trusted
3rd party. For the success of the crypto economy, the 3rd party should remain
decentralized and anonymous. The platform gives such 3rd parties an
opportunity to establish verified and valuable reputation.”)
42 Calcaterra, supra note 15.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
any particular individual actor that the existing law could single out
for jurisdictional reach or liability.
Default rules in the form of fiduciary duties are less relevant in
DAOs. Fiduciary duties are a major default rule in the existing
corporate governance regime. Fiduciary duties are typically
engineered to counteract the corporate governance problems
associated with the separation of ownership and control, and the
associated agency and moral hazard problems. In the DAO structure
such fiduciary duties are less relevant. The autonomous
decentralized nature of DAOs makes fiduciary concepts
superfluous. The disciplining effect of fiduciary duties on
management’s conduct is less needed because centralized
management is minimal in DAOs. Moreover, because of the value-
to-effort focus of work flows in the DAO structure, supervision of
management and imposition of legal duties on management is less
redundant because there are fewer or no supervisors. Rather, token
holders optimize the DAO together according to their best value
propositions in accordance with their unique skillsets, backgrounds,
and training.
4. Lacking On-Chain Voting Mechanism
Existing decentralized protocols lack an effective on-chain voting
mechanism. A one-token-one-vote voting mechanism in existing
decentralized protocols with on-chain governance resembles a
plutocracy. Token holders in a given DAO with a significant share
of the total supply of tokens have more power than the rest of the
DAO members. This is a common phenomenon among
decentralized protocols at the end of 2019. For instance, on and
around September 12, 2017, 4.11% of the bitcoin addresses
controlled 96.53% of the total bitcoin supply.43
Suboptimal voting outcomes associated with one-token-one-vote
voting mechanisms in existing decentralized protocols can largely
be traced back to the immaturity of the existing decentralized
43HOW MUCH.NET, https://howmuch.net/articles/bitcoin-wealth-distribution (last
visited Aug. 19, 2019).
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

protocols. For instance, the low voter participation in existing
decentralized protocols 44 underscores the lacking incentive
alignment of the respective DAO voters and users. Coin owners of
a given network have vested interests in the existing pricing
structure of their respective network. The user, if different form the
coin owners, of that network typically would like the prices to
depreciate.
The immaturity of existing decentralized protocols often also makes
it possible to bribe coin owners to vote against their best interest as
coin owners if the bribe is sufficiently attractive. For instance,
delegated proof of stake protocols such as EOS, Lisk, and Ark are
reported to have experienced instances of bribery. Because certain
nodes in delegated proof of stake protocols have significant power
to validate blocks they are elected by stakeholder votes. That power
leads to corruption. Block validation nodes in delegated proof of
stake protocols are incentivized to bribe voters to be elected as
delegates in exchange for some of the newly inflated tokens.
5. Socially Optimal Forks
Forking requirements in existing decentralized systems are different
from other corporate governance settings. Hard forks are unique in
governance settings in the sense that only a subset of the population,
here the blockchain community associated with a given chain, is
subject to the protocol change. The typical mandatory corporate
governance rule change affects the entire population either via acts
of Congress or agency rule changes.
In the current blockchain governance environment, existing
blockchains generally need to calibrate forks for protocol
upgrades.45 Forks result in previously uniform nodes that, after the
fork, run a different protocol with different data than the newer
version. A soft fork is a backward compatible protocol upgrade. The
44 The original 2016 DAO had less than five percent of voter turnout. See Jentsch,
supra note 33. Even delegated proof of stake protocols, such as Lisk and Ark
where voting plays a crucial part of the protocol rarely experience voter turnout
above fifty percent of total. www.lisk.com; www.ark.com
45 Ethereum foundation tutorial on how to program a basic governance structure
with voting at https://www.ethereum.org/dao (last visited Feb. 11, 2018).
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
soft fork creates a new more restrictive protocol rule, e.g. block size
limit was 1 MB and is changed by the soft fork to 500 KB. Because
it is more restrictive and not more expansive it is backward
compatible with the previous protocol rule. By contrast, the hard
fork creates a more expansive ruleset and is therefore not backward
compatible. For instance, the increase of the block size limit from
1MB per block to 2 MB per block would not be backward
compatible because the previous protocol limited the block size to
1 MB. While sometimes forks are merely used to test a process or
upgrade,46 forking is more often used to implement a fundamental
protocol change, or to create a new digital asset characteristics.
The necessity of chain forking for protocol upgrades in the existing
blockchain infrastructure is associated with significant negative
effects. The bifurcation of nodes can lead to significant problems,
confusion, errors, economic loss, and bugs. For example, in the case
of the bitcoin protocol, changes in defining protocol parameters
such as the difficulty of the cryptographic puzzle, the block size,
limits to additional information that can be added, among other
elements, can result in some blocks being accepted by the new
protocol but rejected by older versions of the protocol. A result can
be the loss of funds. It is theoretically possible that the two and
subsequent chains could grow in parallel indefinitely. The
economic loss associated with such parallel existence can be quite
significant. The result of a hard fork can also be the reemergence of
the double spend problem. Because wallets, merchants, and users
running the previous code deem the new code invalid and thus
cannot detect the spending on the new code, cryptocurrencies spent
in a new block could be spent again on an old block.47
46 (“An example of a hard fork that implemented a new feature is Monero.
Monero underwent a planned hard fork in January 2017, to introduced Ring
Confidential Transactions (RCT). RCT improved security as well as privacy for
Monero users”). MONERO, https://www.getmonero.org/ (Last visited Aug. 19,
2019).
47 The double-spend risk that plagues hard forks does not apply to soft forks
because users and merchants running old nodes will read both new and old
version blocks.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

Contention is another unique risk of a hard fork that can result in
social and political turmoil and the need for blockchain
reorganization. If after a hard fork, the respective community cannot
agree on which chain is the true chain, e.g. the chain that provides
the most likely survivable protocol, it may result in two blockchains
that compete in perpetuity. This was the case with the fork that
created Bitcoin Cash.48 The only viable solution is for one branch
of a chain to be abandoned in favor of the other branch. However,
that can result in some miners losing out because the transactions
they may have mined would be re-allocated. It is difficult to switch
all nodes to the newer version of the protocol at the same time
because decentralized systems are typically too widely spread for
cohesion.
The emergence of decentralized evolutionary protocol upgrades can
help ensure that future DAOs will be less affected by the negative
effects of forks. While the forking necessity in the current system
requirements can be socially optimal,49 the long-term social and
economic loss of a fork could be avoided if decentralized systems
should one day be governed by autonomous evolutionary
governance protocols.50
6. Decentralized Infrastructure Requirements
DAO governance is subject to multiple layers of underdeveloped
decentralized infrastructure requirements. Most of these
infrastructure requirements still necessitate instantiation. First and
foremost, it is important to recognize the timing limitations for
DAO governance. Blockchain technology is a foundational
technology whose transformational impact takes decades rather
than years to take hold and reform legacy systems.
Most complex systems and structures that will be reformed by
decentralized infrastructure technology are interdependent. Reform
and development of one area of decentralized infrastructure
48 BITCOINCASH, www.bitcoincash.com (last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
49 Cathy Barrera & Stephanie Hurder, Blockchain Upgrade as a Coordination
Game (October 17, 2018), https://ssrn.com/abstract=3192208.
50 Calcaterra, supra note 15.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
technology alone cannot be successful. The existence of multiple
additional support structures is needed. Even if the decentralized
infrastructure elements are being developed in any of the major
areas of use cases for blockchain technology, complex discussions
around structural and cultural changes in legacy systems are needed
before the technology can be applied.
The evolution of blockchain technology in corporate governance
requires parallel evolution in both centralized governance structures
and in a decentralized governance environment. The former
requires the authorities and ultimately Congress to come to a
consensus on how and when to implement such technology for the
governance use case. For the latter, a truly decentralized public
blockchain that is scalable and fully secure is needed to accomplish
decentralized infrastructure evolution. Without it, core issues that
have afflicted centralized governance solutions, such as information
asymmetries between principal and agent, censorship, opportunism
of agents, breaches of fiduciary duties, liability rules for principals
and agents, fraud or third-party interference, and overall system
corruption may persist. In decentralized systems, reform of the
agency relationships is possible if and when a truly decentralized
public blockchain emerges that is scalable and fully secure.
As decentralized agency relationships become more complex, a
backstop for human behavior in agency relationships becomes
necessary. The notion that agency relationships in smart contracts
run exactly as coded without any possibility of opportunistic
behavior of the agent is less likely to uphold in complex agency
relationships. Similarly, without a decentralized human backstop to
code, the immutability of the blockchain and its cryptographic
security systems may not be able to create truly transactional
guarantees and trust between principals and agents in the integrity
of their contractual relationship.
IV. Dynamic Governance in Decentralized Systems
Dynamic governance systems are becoming an evolutionary
necessity. Historically, the institutional infrastructure for
rulemaking was geared towards the creation of rules for governing
a relatively stable society with relatively stable economic and
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

market environments. Throughout history, the technological
evolution typically coincided with legal innovations. Therefore,
dynamic elements in rules were less topical at the inception of
institutional arrangements for corporate governance. Since the early
days of societal and market evolution, society and markets have
evolved rapidly and are becoming increasingly more complex. The
growing number of rule enactments, revisions, and revocations in
the centralized legal environment suggest that existing rules and
institutional structures for rulemaking are becoming less capable of
addressing the rapid pace of change. The technological acceleration
in combination with the emerging decentralization of commerce
and society may add another layer of complexity that necessitates
new and reformed dynamic legal approaches for corporate
governance in decentralized structures.
1. Shortcomings of Centralized Governance in Decentralized
Systems
The existing regulatory infrastructure created suboptimal regulatory
outcomes for centralized institutions.51 Regulatory challenges in
centralized institutions were largely the result of facts-based, ex-
post, trial-and-error-rulemaking with stable and presumptively
optimal rules in the existing regulatory framework.52 Another factor
51 Wulf A. Kaal, Evolution of Law: Dynamic Regulation in a New Institutional
Economics Framework, in FESTSCHRIFT ZU EHREN VON CHRISTIAN KIRCHNER
1211 (Wulf A. Kaal, Matthias Schmidt & Andreas Schwartz eds., 2014)
[hereinafter Evolution of Law]; Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the
Financial Services Industry, 48 WAKE FOREST L. REV. 791 (2013); Wulf A.
Kaal, Dampening Financial Regulatory Cycles via Dynamic Regulation – A
Comment on Professor McDonnell, 65 FLA L. REV. F. 32 (2013); Wulf A. Kaal,
Dynamic Regulation via Governmental Contracts, in LIBER AMICORUM PETER
NOBEL (2015); Wulf A. Kaal, Dynamic Regulation for Innovation, in
PERSPECTIVES IN LAW, BUSINESS AND INNOVATION (Mark Fenwick, Wulf A.
Kaal, Toshiyuki Kono & Erik P.M. Vermeulen eds., 2016); Wulf A. Kaal,
Dynamic Regulation to Curtail Excessive Corporate Risk-Taking: A Response
to Professor Schwarcz, 65 ELJ ONLINE 2061 (2016); Wulf A. Kaal & Timothy
A. Lacine, The Effect of Deferred and Non-Prosecution Agreements on
Corporate Governance: Evidence from 1993-2013, 70 BUS. LAW. 61 (2014)
52 Karl R. Popper, THE POVERTY OF HISTORICISM (Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1957); Christian Kirchner, Evolution of Law: Interplay Between Private and
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
that contributed to the increasing regulatory challenges was and
continues to be the suboptimal timing of regulation.53 Because
facts-based, ex-post, trial-and-error-rulemaking cannot anticipate
regulatory issues created by disruptive innovation, existing
rulemakers in centralized systems may not at all or much too late
realize what new regulatory demands apply to innovation and
associated regulatory issues. Rulemakers’ near exclusive reliance
on stable and presumptively optimal rules,54 created to attain
permanent solutions for perceived regulatory issues,55 ignores the
ever-changing environment for rules that are exacerbated by
disruptive innovation.56
The existing challenges for the regulatory infrastructure are going
to be exacerbated by the emergence of ever-increasing
decentralization of business and society.57 Centralized governance
via stable and presumptively optimal rules in an environment of
decentralized smart contracting and DAOs further exacerbates the
shortcomings of stable and presumptively optimal rules in
centralized structures. Facts-based, ex-post, trial-and-error-
rulemaking with stable and presumptively optimal rules in the
existing regulatory framework is incompatible with the needs of
decentralized systems. Decentralized systems do not have a central
intelligence or leadership system based on traditional hierarchies.
Instead, the intelligence in decentralized systems is spread
throughout the system. Because information and knowledge
Public Rule-Making A New Institutional Economics-Analysis, 4 ERASMUS L.
REV. 161 (2012).
53 Wulf A. Kaal & Erik P.M. Vermeulen, How to Regulate Disruptive
Innovation – From Facts to Data, 57 JURIMETRICS 169 (2017).
54 See Evolution of Law, supra note 51, at 1212 (“[T]he institutional
infrastructure for rulemaking was geared towards the creation of rules for
governing a relatively stable society with less upward mobility and relatively
stable economic and market environments.”); Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the
Financial Services Industry, supra note 51; Kaal, Dynamic Regulation via
Government Contracts, supra note 51; Kaal & Lacine, supra note 51.
55 Evolution of Law, supra note 51, at 1218.
56 Kaal, Dynamic Regulation for Innovation, supra note 51.
57 Wulf A. Kaal, Decentralization: Past, Present, and Future (2019)
(unpublished manuscript) (on file at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3411897); Wulf A.
Kaal, Decentralization: A Primer on the New Economy (2019) (unpublished
manuscript) (on file at https://ssrn.com/abstract=3406323).
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

naturally filter in at the edges of the decentralized system, facts-
based, ex-post, trial-and-error-rulemaking with stable and
presumptively optimal rules in the existing regulatory framework
cannot encapsulate in a timely fashion the regulatory needs of the
system. Decentralized systems can also very easily mutate and
change because the information flow is optimized through dynamic
feedback effects. This is antithetical to the static rule-based system
of the existing regulatory infrastructure.
The timing of rulemaking in an environment of decentralized smart
contracts and DAOs is going to be a primary problem for regulators.
Formal rulemaking in the existing regulatory infrastructure is
almost always too time-consuming for a centralized marketplace. 58
Decentralized systems morph much quicker than centralized
systems and thus exacerbate the timing inadequacies of the existing
regulatory infrastructure. The speed of smart contracting and the
associated DAO revisions will make regulations pertaining to
morphing and evolving decentralized systems obsolete before static
centralized regulations are finalized.
The lack of natural language further exacerbates the timing issue.
Even if existing courts could exercise jurisdiction over
decentralized parties, the code-based legal arrangements would
need to be translated into natural language which may often not be
possible and would create significant cost and timing restrictions.
Interpretation of non-natural language in smart contract disputes
also creates major hurdles for the regulators and courts. Coded
contractual intent may be unclear and natural language intent can
often not be used for interpretation. The cost of “translation” of
coded contractual intent has the potential to become overwhelming
for the existing centralized legal infrastructure.
Centralized agency power is rather difficult to exercise over
decentralized systems because the system is decentralized,
58 Evolution of Law, supra note 51, at 1218; Kaal, Dynamic Regulation for
Innovation, supra note 51; Cass R. Sunstein, Is the Clean Air Act
Unconstitutional?, 98 MICH. L. REV. 303, 371 (1999); Thomas O. McGarity,
Some Thoughts on "Deossifying" the Rulemaking Process, 41 DUKE L.J. 1385,
1386 (1992); Jo Ann S. Barefoot, Disrupting FinTech Law, 18 FINTECH L. REP.
10 (2015).
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
autonomous, and secured by a consensus algorithm. Attempts by
the government to exert power over the system by influencing any
number of individuals within its jurisdiction, would require
complete control of fifty one percent of the anonymous global users
before it could change any part of the code in the decentralized
system. The security of decentralized systems guarantees that no
outside power will have the ability to control the non-state actor
attempted to take that extreme action. Because of the transparent
nature of decentralized systems, users would instantly know about
the takeover attempt. Such an event would lead to a loss of
confidence and cause ultimately the failure of the entire structure.
Because decentralized systems are autonomous, even if a
government did find some of the anonymous individuals whose
work maintains the ledger, it would be difficult to argue personal
responsibility for any wrongdoing. Miners are running a universal
algorithm on computers connected to a global network.
The inability to exercise existing notions of jurisdiction over
decentralized systems creates friction between decentralized
systems and the existing legal infrastructure. Traditional
jurisdictional means have limited applicability in the context of
blockchain technology. Traditional jurisdictional principles cannot
directly apply to blockchain technology because the blockchain is a
mere collection of agreed-upon calculations by decentralized
computer systems. The blockchain is merely an idea reached by the
consensus of computation; it is pure information, contained only in
the mathematical rules of its inception and the sum of the
computation. The blockchain is entirely maintained and owned by
a distributed group of anonymous users located around the planet.
The nodes hold imperfect partial copies of the blockchain; no
particular node holds the entire blockchain. Hence, the concept of
jurisdictional presence is difficult to apply to the blockchain.
Decentralization of business and society may inaugurate
unprecedented change in society with significant uncertainty and
unknown future contingencies. The existing regulatory
infrastructure with stable and presumptively optimal rules is largely
incapable of addressing these increases in unknown future
contingencies associated with disruptive decentralization. Given the
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

pace of emerging decentralization, 59 future contingencies in
rulemaking are likely to substantially increase, making the dynamic
anticipation of future contingencies more important for rulemaking.
2. Benefits of Dynamic Decentralized Governance
Supplementing the regulatory infrastructure with dynamic
decentralized elements can help address suboptimal regulatory
outcomes60 for decentralized systems. Decentralized rulemaking
via code is subject to suboptimal stable regulatory outcomes, just
like centralized governance. In light of the growth trajectory for
smart contracting, rulemaking via code can be seen, on the one
hand, as an attempt to cope with an ever-increasing complex market
and legal environment that necessitates technological solutions. On
the other hand, coded solutions are subject to natural flaws (bugs)
and cannot evolutionarily change protocols. As such, coded
solutions for an exponentially changing environment are also a
stable and presumptively optimal attempt at creating new solutions
and benefit from dynamic elements to overcome those
shortcomings.
Because the conditions and the corresponding requirements for
optimal and stable hardcoded rules are constantly evolving, making
different sets of hardcoded rules optimal over time,61 dynamic
elements in the coding and rulemaking process can help increase
the availability of relevant information for rulemaking and improve
system design.62 Dynamic regulation as conceptualized in theory is
intended to create anticipatory regulatory responses.63 The same
may apply in the context of coded system designs where smart
contract templates that are affirmed by a DAO as optimal can be
used anticipatorily by other DAOs who may encounter similar
necessities in the future.
59 Kaal, Decentralization: Past, Present, and Future, supra note 57; Kaal,
Decentralization: A Primer on the New Economy, surpa note 57.
60 Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, supra note 51;
Evolution of Law, supra note 51.
61 Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, supra note 51.
62 Id.
63 Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, supra note 51.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
In decentralized systems, feedback effects can occur much more
frequently and in many more settings compared with centralized
systems.64 The timeliness and quality of information is the focus of
dynamic governance rules65 in dynamic decentralized frameworks.
The increased availability of relevant, decentralized, and timely
information for governance rules in a dynamic decentralized
framework enables unprecedented feedback effects. Because the
information is on the edge of the decentralized system and is
transferred peer-to-peer directly, information reaches subroutines
and subsystems much more directly and timely. Accordingly,
feedback effects in a dynamic decentralized governance framework
can enhance the availability of institution-specific decentralized
information dramatically, especially compared to centralized
systems.66 Because the improved information is on the edge of the
decentralized system and is transferred peer-to-peer directly,
feedback effects can instantiate in subroutines and subsystems
much more directly and timely. Rather than acquiring the necessary
information ex-post after rules have emerged as suboptimal,
feedback effects help increase the availability of relevant
information for governance rules ex-ante and anticipate necessary
revisions before rules emerge as suboptimal.67
The combination of feedback processes, enhanced information for
rulemaking, and institution-specific ex-ante experimentation
facilitates the anticipation of future contingencies for decentralized
governance. Adapting rules to such identified future contingencies
becomes the focal point for rulemaking in a dynamic decentralized
framework.68 Finally, anticipatory dynamic coded regulation can
help minimize costly and suboptimal ex-post trial-and-error
64 See infra Part V.1. on feedback effects in DAOs.
65 Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, supra note 51.;
Evolution of Law, supra note 51.
66 Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, supra note 51.;
Evolution of Law, supra note 51.
67 Kaal, Dynamic Regulation of the Financial Services Industry, supra note 51,
at 160; Evolution of Law, supra note 51.
68 Id.
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

experimentation with stable and presumptively optimal rules in
decentralized systems.
V. Optimizing DAO Governance
Innovation, the complexities of financial markets, and ever-
changing circumstances of smart contracting require decentralized
institutional arrangements and a rulemaking process that
continuously adjusts to these challenges. The complexities of
today’s increasingly decentralized society,69 its coded solutions to
remedy the complexities, costs, etc., and markets benefit from
dynamic coded institutional arrangements and processes for coded
rulemaking.
Future DAO designs have the capacity to substantially upgrade
institutional governance. Unlike existing institutional governance
designs, future DAO designs and any derivations thereof will likely
be community based. DAO Governance is determined by the
respective DAO members in any given DAO. Such DAO member
generated upgrades are based on feedback effects pertaining to
previous version of DAO designs. Hence, future DAO designs will
likely vary substantially. The ability to reform DAO governance
design, and with it corporate governance, is impacted by the design
parameters of the given DAO.
The success of DAO governance designs is determined by several
core factors. First and foremost, the level of decentralization in the
DAO governance design is determinative for its future resilience
and attack resistance. Incentive alignment of DAO constituents is a
core function of successful decentralization and has a significant
impact on the success of the governance design. Dynamic feedback
effects in the DAO governance design also impact its ability to
evolutionarily provide solutions as the circumstances of the DAO
change. The structure and extent of on-chain DAO governance is
also an important evolving design factor. Finally, decentralized
autonomous and anonymous reputation verification systems offer
much needed governance design input parameters that so far could
not been provided otherwise.
69 Kaal, Decentralization: Past, Present, and Future, supra note 57.
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
1. Dynamic DAO Governance
Decentralized dynamic DAO governance can serve as regulatory
supplements enabling rulemakers’ adaptation to regulatory
contingencies if and when they arise. Decentralization exacerbates
the existing inability of centralized rulemaking structures to address
the shortcomings in the rulemaking process for stable and
presumptively optimal rules. Feedback effects in DAOs provide
relevant, timely, decentralized, and institution-specific information
ex-ante. By increasing the availability of information ex-ante,
dynamic regulatory tools help lower unforeseen contingencies in
the rulemaking process pertaining to innovation. Improved
information for rulemaking also helps to maintain certainty in the
rulemaking process.
DAO governance epitomizes dynamic regulation. DAOs integrate
feedback effects in governance design because the information in
the system is fully transparent and constantly updated. Centralized
regulatory agencies can examine trends in smart contracts in a given
industry by examining the publicly available information.
Similarly, regulates can code warning triggers in their governance
design to comply with external regulatory requirements. Mandated
governance rules can be coded directly in smart contracts if and
when trends justify regulatory code to be included.
DAO governance must be dynamic to avoid corruptive influences.
Stable and presumptively optimal static constitutional rules for
DAO governance typically enable gaming and arbitrage
opportunities. In any open and democratic system, naturally
opportunistic rational parties will attempt to circumvent and game
the sets of applicable complex static rules to increase their share of
power and profit within the system. To enable sufficient protection
of DAO members while at the same time allowing for DAO
enhancements, the static sets of rules of smart contracts in such a
system will need to be rather complex. With static complex sets of
DAO rules comes inevitable corruptive opportunistic gaming and
arbitrage behavior. To avoid these negative effects of static complex
DAO rules, effective DAO governance designs should be focused
on dynamic elements. Dynamic elements here include DAO
members’ ability to re-evaluate existing precedent in the system.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

Unlike the existing corporate governance framework, the
technological infrastructure underpinning DAOs enables
autonomous and evolutionary incomplete smart contract upgrades.
With dynamic DAO governance mechanisms, DAO token holders
can vote for a change of any outdated or flawed code as the flaws
materialize or in anticipation of future contingencies. In that sense,
DAOs can generate majoritarian rules ex-post without the need for
ex-ante majoritarian rules that function as default rules.70 Ex-post
code-based majoritarian rules are superior to ex-ante majoritarian
rules because they are based on more accurate real-time information
from the edge and decentralized feedback effects. Ex-post code-
based majoritarian rules are not subject to the same information
asymmetries as stable and presumptively optimal ex-ante rules. As
such, DAOs enable a code-based governance infrastructure that can
create dynamic governance protocol upgrades in real-time through
dynamic feedback loops.
Dynamic and evolutionary reputation-based DAO governance is
possible via a decentralized on-chain precedent system. 71 A
decentralized on-chain precedent system enables feedback effects
between DAO members, the public record of work/posts on the
blockchain, and the public users. The decentralized precedent
system makes the continuous upgrading of real-time data possible.72
As a post/template on the blockchain gets increasingly referenced
by the DAO members and other users, it increases in non-fungible
reputation weight and associated fungible salaries. Conversely, if a
post/template on the blockchain dissipates over time, a new
post/template emerges naturally. If the new post/template gets more
often referenced by the DAO members and other users, it becomes
over time the new prevailing precedent. The old precedent
dissipates over time with non-use.73
70 Contra see supra Part II.
71 Calcaterra, supra note 15. The design here is possible because of the Weighted
DAG in Calcaterra’s design.
72 Id. As Calcaterra shows, the relative weight of a contribution posted on the
blockchain can increase if such contribution is referenced or used by other DAO
members or protocols. This particular precedent setting feature enables a
precedent system within a decentralized autonomous system.
73 Id.
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
2. Level of Decentralization
The level of decentralization may be a proxy for optimized DAO
design parameters. The more decentralized a given DAO design, the
more likely it is to affect its precedence and adoption. The level of
decentralization and the associated attack resistance and
incorruptibility of DAO governance designs are among the core
factors that influence DAO design adoption, its precedence, and
longevity. However, not all future DAO designs will comply with
the ideal typical DAO parameters. Ideal typical DAO design ideal
typical DAO design parameters will naturally filter out at the edges.
In other words, because the optimal DAO design parameters change
constantly, if and when formerly ideal typical designs fail, new and
optimized designs will replace them.
The level of decentralization in DAO designs increases with the
following instantiations in DAO governance: a) anonymity of DAO
members, e.g. DAO members cannot be personally identified other
than by their respective merit in the DAO structure;74 b) merit
identifiers, e.g. DAO members merit, knowledge, and influence is
measured through their respective DAO non-fungible token
ownership;75 c) non-fungibility of tokens; e.g. merit of a DAO
member is expressed by an non-fungible reputation token that
cannot be bought or sold;76 d) full transparency, e.g. all DAO
decisions are fully transparently accessible by the public and the
DAO members themselves;77 e) indirect economic incentives, e.g.
DAO members are getting paid with fungible tokens in proportion
to their non-fungible tokens;78 f) decisions in the DAO are made
with a voting design that revolves around staking of non-fungible
tokens;79 and g) fungible salary tokens are designed as stable
cryptocurrencies and maintain their value at around $1US.80
74 Calcaterra et al., supra note 41.
75 Id.
76 Id.
77 Id.
78 Id.
79 Id.
80 Craig Calcaterra et al., Stable Cryptocurrencies, WASH. U. J. OF L. & POL’Y
(forthcoming May 2019).
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

Several other factors influence the level of decentralization of DAO
designs that are beyond the scope of this article.
3. Incentive Alignment
Incentive alignment is at the core of centralized and decentralized
governance designs. The failures of incentive alignment in
centralized governance structures are well documented.81 Unlike
centralized governance incentive design, decentralized incentive
alignment in the DAO can be organized in an incorruptible way with
non-fungible digital assets. Because of the technological
infrastructure of decentralized systems, it is possible that
decentralized incentive design can create solutions that could not so
far be accomplished in centralized governance structures.
Collective action problems associated with lacking incentive
alignment in existing agency-based governance designs can be
overcome by efficiently designed DAO governance.
Optimized DAO governance design needs to incentivize DAO
members with indirect economic gain. This is possible with a
combination of token designs. In a bifurcated DAO design with two
disparate types of tokens, DAO members would only indirectly gain
economically if: 1. Non-fungible tokens give them voting rights in
the DAO and are used as a merit score in the respective DAO, 2.
Fungible tokens allow DAO members to earn a fungible salary
tokens in proportion to their non-fungible tokens. DAO members
would increase their non-fungible tokens by making valuable
contributions to the DAO. They would get paid in fungible tokens
in proportion to their respective non-fungible token score in a given
DAO. The indirect economic effects remove corruptive elements
and make the governance design more attack resistant and stable in
the long run.82
Community-driven audits in DAO governance improve incentive
alignment. Centralized systems rarely provide for and administer
community-driven audits. Community-driven audits go against the
81 See supra Part III 1.-3.
82 Craig Calcaterra & Wulf A. Kaal, Secure Proof of Stake Protocol, (U of St.
Thomas (Minnesota) Legal Studies Research Paper No. 18-10, 2019),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3125827.
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
agency and monitoring principles embedded in the centralized
governance. External monitoring and validation are key in
centralized governance systems because the incentive design in
centralized structures does not enable incorruptible internal
controls. By contrast, community audits are at the core of DAO
governance that is equipped with an effective incentive design. The
decentralized nature of DAOs enhances efficiency of coordination
because the users of the system, e.g. DAO members, typically know
best how to assess other users / DAO members. The decentralized
DAO structure enables unprecedented information symmetry in the
governance design because governance information, e.g. DAO
group decision making metrics and DAO governance protocol
needs, is at the edge of the decentralized system and is exchanged
and evaluated directly between DAO members in a continuous and
iterative stream of information that provides dynamic feedback
effects.
DAO governance designs enable a much more equal distribution of
power. Language, religion, race, physical presence, group
identifiers, culture, etc., influence centralized power distribution.
Similarly, commonly used identifiers in centralized governance
such as social media profiles and credit scores, among others, are
essential for access to the central system and to resources. Such
relatively superficial identifiers play less of a role in DAO voting
designs. The more equal distribution of power in the DAO
governance design allows the inclusion of constituents who
otherwise have no agency in centralized systems.
4. On-Chain DAO Governance
Since its inception, the blockchain community has debated the
preferable modus operandi for protocol changes. 83 Most
83 E.g., see this discussion: Buck Perley, Crypto-Governance and the Dangers
of Faction, MEDIUM (Oct. 27, 2017), https://medium.com/@BuckPerley/crypto-
governance-f1318affbbe0; Fred Ehrsam, Blockchain Governance:
Programming Our Future, MEDIUM (Nov. 27, 2017),
https://medium.com/@FEhrsam/blockchain-governance-programming-our-
future-c3bfe30f2d74; Vlad Zamfir, Against On-chain Governance, MEDIUM
(Dec. 1, 2017), https://medium.com/@Vlad_Zamfir/against-on-chain-
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

cryptocurrencies would not exist if Bitcoin and Ethereum had
incentives for future protocol development and governance built
into the core protocol.84 The community has considered different
attempts and proposals for more fully democratized blockchain
governance. Those proposals included Ethereum Improvement
Proposals, 85 Bitcoin Improvement Proposals, 86 Ethereum General
Assembly,87 mailing lists,88 and suggestion pages on GitHub
trees.89
On-chain governance is a necessity for most public blockchains.
Because all existing blockchains need to calibrate soft forks for
protocol upgrades, most public blockchain communities that value
decentralization have considered on-chain governance for their
protocol. 90 Certain protocols have expanded their on-chain
governance considerations. These include, but are not limited to:
governance-a4ceacd040ca; Vitalik Buterin, Notes on Blockchain Governance,
VITALIK.CA (Dec. 17, 2017), https://vitalik.ca/general/2017/12/17/voting.html.
84 Naval Ravikant (@Naval), TWITTER (Apr. 13, 2018, 9:55 PM),
https://twitter.com/naval/status/985018594252742656.
85 Adam Reese, Ethereum Dev Yoichi Hirai Steps Away From Role As EIP
Editor, Raises Questions About Process, ETHNEWS: ECOSYSTEM (Feb. 15,
2018), https://www.ethnews.com/ethereum-dev-yoichi-hirai-steps-away-from-
role-as-eip-editor-raises-questions-ab. For a good argument from the former EIP
editor that the EIP system is dangerous, who has since retired based on his
serious concerns.
86 WIKIPEDIA: BITCOIN IMPROVEMENT PROPOSALS,
https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Bitcoin_Improvement_Proposals (Last visited Aug. 19,
2019).
87 Gavofyork, Yellow Paper Committee, GITHUB (Apr. 10, 2016),
https://github.com/gavofyork/curly-engine.
88 LISTS.OZLABS.ORG, https://lists.ozlabs.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev-moderation/
(last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
89 E.g., Aragon’s Governance Page: Aragon, Governance, GITHUB (Sept. 22,
2017), https://github.com/aragon/governance.
90 The Ethereum foundation has a tutorial for how to program a basic
governance structure with voting at ETHEREUM, https://www.ethereum.org/dao
(last visited Feb. 11, 2018).
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
Tendermint,91 PolkaDot,92 DAOstack,93Tezos,94 Dash,95 Bitshares,
Lisk, MemoryCoin, Aragon, 96 Cardano, 97 Maker, 98 and
NuShares.99
Arguments against on-chain governance are bountiful. Arguably, an
off-chain governance system that finds an equilibrium between
several competing factors could be a better alternative for protocol
governance than an on-chain governance mechanism.100 In an off-
91 Ethan Buchman, Tendermint: Byzantine Fault Tolerance in the Age of
Blockchains (June 2016) (unpublished A.A.S. thesis, University of Guelph),
https://atrium.lib.uoguelph.ca/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10214/9769/Buchman_Et
han_201606_MAsc.pdf?sequence=7&isAllowed=y.
92 Rachel Rose O’Leary, Polkadot’s Plan for Governing a Blockchain of
Blockchains, COINDESK (Mar. 22, 2018, 1:10 UTC),
https://www.coindesk.com/polkadots-radical-plan-governing-blockchain-
blockchains/ (“the internal token of the Polkadot network, allows its holders to
vote directly on a piece of code, which will then automatically upgrade across
the network.”).
93 DAOstack, An Operating System for Collective Intelligence, (White Paper
V1.1, April 22, 2018), https://daostack.io/wp/DAOstack-White-Paper-en.pdf.
94 (tezos, Tezos-Papers, GITHUB (Oct. 25, 2016),
https://github.com/tezos/tezos-papers.
95Joel Valenzuela, Dash Surges to Record High, Claims $0.5 Mln Monthly
Development Budget, COINTELEGRAPH (Mar. 13, 2017),
https://cointelegraph.com/news/dash-surges-to-record-high-claims-05-mln-
monthly-development-budget. Decentralized Governance by Blockchain
includes a system where “masternodes” have voting power and control of a
development budget that takes 10% of the mined profit, which they claim
amounted to more than $500,00 US per month in March 2017. However,
masternodes can have incentives that are not always aligned with other users so
that such on-chain governance may skew the development of the platform in
unhealthy ways.
96 Luis Cuende & Jorge Izquierdo, Aragon Network: A Decentralized
Infrastructure for Value Exchange, (White Paper Version 1.1.1, April 2017),
https://www.chainwhy.com/upload/default/20180705/49f3850f2702ec6be0f577
80b22feab2.pdf.
97 CARDANO, https://www.cardano.org/en/academic-papers/ (last visited Aug.
19, 2019).
98 MAKERDAO, https://makerdao.com/ (last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
99 NUBITS, https://nubits.com/nushares (last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
100 Buterin, Notes on Blockchain Governance, see supra note 83. Vitalik
Buterin argues. Factors to be considered for an off-chain governance system
include: consensus among development team, initial roadmap, coin holder
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

chain governance model, miners provide checks and balances on
power over protocol changes. On-chain governance arguably
removes such checks and balances. An on-chain governance model
also arguably would take the participation of governance away from
miners and subsequently users. Because an on-chain governance
enables automatic protocol upgrades and is not dependent on
manual interference by miners, miners are no longer required to
make a conscious choice to participate in their chosen chain.101
Emerging more mature voting ecosystems enable on-chain protocol
governance with an incentive design that more optimally balances
risk and rewards of voting. Alternative voting methods include
quadratic voting, 102 futarchy, 103 liquid democracy, 104 and
reputation-based voting as an instantiation of non-fungible
voting.105 These voting alternatives can ameliorate the traditional
voting power corruption of one-token-one-vote.
On-chain governance models can further be optimized with
reputation-based staking as voting mechanisms.106 Reputation-
based voting revolves around voting by way of staking a non-
fungible asset, aka staking non-fungible reputation tokens in a given
DAO, towards a certain outcome. The corruptive elements of
fungible assets/tokens are removed because third parties are less
likely able to take over a non-fungible assets, such as reputation,
that is organically grown and maintained through actual expertise
in a given DAO subject matter. Even if third parties should be able
to take over or purchase non-fungible reputation, they are less likely
voting, user voting with some kind of Sybil resistant polling system, and
established norms.
101 In off-chain governance models node operators have to update their client
manually for a protocol upgrade to align with the new chain.
102 Steven Lalley & Eric Glen Weyl, Quadratic Voting: How Mechanism
Design Can Radicalize Democracy, (December 24, 2017),
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2003531.
103 Robin Hanson, Futarchy: Vote Values, But Bet Beliefs, MASON.GMU.EDU,
http://mason.gmu.edu/~rhanson/futarchy.html (last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
104 WIKIPEDIA: DELEGATIVE DEMOCRACY,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Delegative_democracy (last visited Aug. 19,
2019).
105 Calcaterra & Kaal, supra note 82; Calcaterra, supra note 15.
106 Id.; Calcaterra et al., supra note 41; Calcaterra, supra note 15.
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
able to maintain the reputation score and the associated revenue
stream of fungible assets over time.
5. Reputation-Based Governance
Reputation can take on an unprecedented role in decentralized
governance mechanisms. Reputation-based governance can
optimize actors’ incentive design in the decentralized governance
infrastructure. Reputation can generally be defined as a predictor
for actors’ future behavior given the history of actors’ actions.
Reputation is central for proper incentivization in the existing
centralized infrastructure for business and government. Because of
the advances in emerging decentralized technology, reputation can
take on an unprecedented role in future decentralized governance
mechanisms.
Reputation-based metrics were ineffective in centralized
governance systems. Before the emergence of blockchain
technology, reputation could not be stored autonomously,
anonymously, and transparently. Accordingly, reputation was not a
reliable predictor of actors’ future actions in centralized governance
systems. Existing reputation governance designs, such as the web
of trust 107 and even more primitive designs such as simple
reputation triangulation metrics, 108 suffered from countless
inadequacies, including sybil attacks 109 and tyranny of the
majority.110 These shortcomings undermined the meaning and
value of digital reputation in centralized internet platform-based
businesses. What made things worse, these past centralized attempts
at reputation verification were unable to meet the demands of
107 WIKIPEDIA: WEB OF TRUST, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_of_trust
(Last visited Aug. 19, 2019).
108 Ebay, Uber and many other company use these reputation metrics. See e.g.
ebay.com, uber.com
109 Binance Academy, Sybil Attacks Explained, BINANCE ACADEMY (Dec. 8,
2019), https://www.binance.vision/security/sybil-attacks-explained; WIKIPEDIA:
SYBIL ATTACK, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sybil_attack (last visited Aug. 19,
2019).
110 Lin Chen, et al., Tyranny of the Majority: On the (Im)possibility of
Correctness of Smart Contracts, 16 IEEE SECURITY & PRIVACY 30 (2018),
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=8425620.
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

constantly changing protocol needs.111 They were based on stable
and presumptively optimal rules which are vulnerable to gaming.
Reputation has key advantages over existing decentralized voting
mechanisms. Reputation has two key advantages over existing
decentralized one-token-one-vote voting mechanisms: 1) it is non-
fungible which avoids corruptive elements,112 and 2) it optimally
aligns incentives for DAO members individually and at the same
time for the totality of the DAO as an institution. 113 Because
reputation is non-fungible and ideally anonymous, it is much harder
for DAO members and external participants to try to game the
system to improve their own utility exclusively while hurting the
common good of the DAO.
Reputation as a valuation metric allows DAO members to improve
their own utility while at the same time improving the whole
institution over the long term. If reputation is used as a metric for
indirect economic benefits, e.g. a salary in fungible tokens that is
paid in proportion of the non-fungible reputation token score, DAO
reputation token holders are incentivized to increase their own
reputation/utility by engaging in valuable conduct for the DAO. The
more the aggregated individual reputation of all DAO members
increases the more the overall institution’s value increases and the
more the institution creates value enhancing outcomes for its
members.
Reputation-staking as a basis for DAO governance improves
incentive alignment. Reputation-staking as a basis for DAO
governance enables the correlation between individual and
institutional value enhancement. DAO members rationally stake
their own reputation tokens based on the outcomes they believe will
increase their overall reputation/utility. If they did not they would
irrationally surrender a future income stream in fungible tokens.
Through reputation-staking, the DAO members are incentivized to
provide long-term positive contributions because the DAO member
111 See supra note 51 (effects of stable and presumptively optimal rules).
112 Calcaterra and Kaal, supra note 82.
113 Calcaterra et al, supra note 41.
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
reputation is transparent and reviewable by the DAO and the public
in a slow and stable review process that reaches far into the future.
Valuable individual behavior/work that leads to individualized
reputation staking and individual reputation enhancement also
enhances the DAO as an institution because the individual and
institutional value enhancement are correlated.114
Reputation-based DAO governance design changes the dynamic of
a zero-sum game to a positive-sum game. Existing DAO
governance designs were mostly zero-sum games. Existing DAO
governance designs used mostly fungible rewards and incentive
designs where DAO members pursued as large of a portion of the
rewards as possible for themselves. By contrast, the reputation-
based DAO creates a positive-sum game because DAO members
have incentives to create lasting non-fungible value for the
institution by developing a long-term non-fungible record of
productive cooperation that in effect improves the DAO. Moreover,
individual DAO member reputation can change dynamically if
DAO member actions depreciate in value. The DAO member
reputation should be inflationary in the DAO design. As such, non-
use, e.g. non-staking or non-voting, would lead to value
depreciation, which incentivizes action and thus value
enhancement.
VI. Reforming Corporate Governance
Future optimized DAO designs may accomplish significant
upgrades for DAO governance that can help reform traditional
notions of corporate governance. The remarks below are based on
ideal-typical DAO governance design parameters. Not all future
DAO designs will follow these ideal-typical parameters.
114 Take for instance, a DAO member who stakes that a given smart contract
template is optimal for XYZ outcome/application. Once the template is affirmed
by the DAO members as optimal at that point in time, it becomes a valuable
precedent for the DAO members and external DAOs. Hence, the staking of an
individual and the ex-ante work that leads to staking increases sustainable value
for all DAO members. The DAO members and other DAOs will rationally
increasingly use the precedent until a better precedent emerges. That precedent
thus increases the individual DAO member’s reputation and the DAO overall.
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

DAO token holders are largely free from existing corporate
hierarchies and their restricting effects. People who work for a DAO
are subject to a different kind of agency relationship and not subject
to a centralized supervisor or CEO who received legitimacy through
centralized validation. Instead, DAO workers work in a dynamic set
of working relationships that continuously and dynamically self-
organize around projects and outcomes, not corporate hierarchies.
The intrinsic motivation of DAO members changes incentive
structure and governance outcomes compared with traditional
hierarchical organizations. Most hierarchical organizations rely
predominantly on extrinsic incentive structures, through wages etc.
By contrast, the core common denominator for all DAO token
members is the unifying desire to optimize the DAO structure and
the DAO reputation token value. If a member-identified
optimization has the potential to make the DAO more meaningful,
useful, or valuable to the token holder members, the DAO token
holders will desire to perform such optimization tasks as it is in their
very interest to do so to help increase the value of their DAO
reputation tokens.
Performance assessment in the DAO governance structure is based
on DAO value optimization. Existing centralized and decentralized
governance designs often rely on hierarchical or political processes
and external monitoring and validation. By contrast, DAO workers’
performance is assessed in an anonymized proposal voting scheme
which is the predominant basis for assessment and payment. If
DAO members perform well, they will get remunerated regardless
of politics, background, or education. Validation and monitoring
can be internal to the DAO. The predominant factor that counts for
purposes of assessment of DAO worker performance is the work’s
impact on DAO value optimization.
Non-performance penalties in the DAO structure are free from
biases. If DAO community members do not deliver on a proposal
that was voted in by the DAO token holder community they lose
credibility in the DAO token holder community and may be
perceived as lacking an ability to add value. In fact, non-
performance on proposal comes with significant reputational
penalties. Non-performers in the DAO structure will be less likely
to have future opportunities to earn tokens because the other token
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
holders are unlikely to approve non-performer proposals. Crucially,
non-performance reputational penalties are entirely free from racial
or cultural biases and associated implications as the token holders
are unlikely to even know each other. Rather, they all work towards
a common goal of optimizing the DAO and the token value.
The DAO governance design benefits all constituents. DAO
governance designs emphasize token holders’ incentives to add
value to the DAO community. That benefits all constituents.
Because projects that cannot add value take token holders’ time
away from more productive endeavors, token holders become
focused on managing their time and efforts. Unlike in traditional
hierarchical organization where face-time and unproductive
meetings are the norm, the self-governing DAO token optimizer
avoids any such corporate hierarchy inefficiencies and frees herself
from top-down inefficiencies and negative outcomes.115
Politics in the DAO structure have a different nature compared with
traditional hierarchical corporate structures. In a traditional
corporate hierarchy, position in the hierarchy and associated
authority determine effort. In other word, the supervisor in the
hierarchical structure can determine where, what, and when workers
have to perform, resulting in suboptimal outcomes, attendance of
unproductive and useless meetings, among many other negative
effects. By contrast, in the decentralized DAO environment,
influence is determined by the value a given token holder
contributed to a project’s success.
The value-to-effort focus of work flows in the DAO structure has
the potential to reform agency relationships in governance. The
115 The DAO work proposal and value optimization structure allows the
avoidance of bad projects, bad colleagues, and unproductive meetings. The
dominant incentive across all DAO constituents is value enhancement. Of course,
“value” can have differing meaning, depending on the DAO. If value can be
added, the tasks will be performed, if the assessment of the proposal suggests that
the value proposition is in doubt token holders will try to spend their time and
skills on more productive and value-adding tasks. Importantly, because the DAO
structure functions without supervisors, DAO token holders who decide they
cannot add value on a given task can move to more productive endeavors that
better utilize their skills without any penalties that would exist in the traditional
hierarchical corporate structure.
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

value-focused performance in the DAO structure helps optimize
work flows and creates sustainable solutions for DAO token
holders. The supervisor in the traditional hierarchical corporate
structure can determine where, what, and when workers have to
perform, which often results in attendance of unproductive
meetings, facetime, support for suboptimal outcomes to please
supervisors, among many other suboptimal outcomes. By contrast,
in the decentralized environment of DAOs, influence and outcomes
are not created by hierarchy but rather determined by the value a
token holder’s contributions to a project’s success. Moreover, if a
token holder adds substantial value to the DAO, other DAO token
holders will want to add their skills in the same context which
focuses the token holders’ efforts on the highest possible value
proposition.
VII. Conclusion
For the first time in history, blockchain technology gives actors and
institutions the environment to collaborate on neutral territory.
Every member’s contributions to an institution can be recorded in a
fully transparent way. These unprecedented technological features
enable corporations and other forms of business organizations to be
supplemented with blockchain-based agency constructs. As such,
DAOs expand the definition of the firm, question the need for firms,
and call into question the various versions of the theory of the firm.
DAOs have started to challenge the dominant governance structures
facilitated by legacy agency constructs. Future ideal-typical DAO
governance designs will be filtered out at the edges of the system
and will be subject to ongoing dynamic iterative change and
upgrading. The technological infrastructure for DAOs enables these
emerging features.
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

BLOCKCHAIN-BASED CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3441904

