Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
Chapter 22. Indirect Regulation of Hedge Funds
Wulf A. Kaal*
Abstract
This book chapter examines theoretical approaches for hedge
fund regulation and emphasizes indirect regulatory means for the
industry. The chapter shows that indirect regulation of the hedge fund
industry attains most regulatory objectives while providing the industry
with sufficient leeway.
Key Words: hedge fund, Regulation, Indirect Regulation, Private
Investment Funds, Private Equity, Diversification, Compliance,
Optimization, Indirect Regulation, Regulatory Models
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
* Professor, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis). The author is
grateful for outstanding support from librarian Nicole Catalin.
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ 3
II. THE NEED FOR HEDGE FUND REGULATION .......................................................... 5
1. Industry Practices ................................................................................. 9
2. Regulatory Reactions .......................................................................... 11
III. REGULATORY APPROACHES ....................................................................... 12
1. National Direct Regulation.................................................................. 13
2. Co-coordinated International Co-operation ......................................... 14
3. Prudential hedge fund Regulation ....................................................... 16
IV. INDIRECT REGULATION ............................................................................. 18
1. Fund Regulation via Banking Supervision ............................................ 20
2. Capital Adequacy Standards ............................................................... 21
V. CONCLUSION ...................................................................................... 24
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
I. Introduction
Hedge fund regulation is faced with several unique factors that make
it different from other financial regulations. Markets will be at risk
and investors are insufficiently protected without adequate regulation.
Regulators can use a number of direct regulatory tools including
capital, margin and reporting requirements, and mandatory regulation
to regulate hedge funds.1 Yet, regulators are faced with the problem
of jurisdictional arbitrage, i.e. if they regulate directly, hedge funds
may relocate offshore and escape from regulation altogether. If
regulators impose weak regulations, investors may not be afforded
adequate protection.
Several key factors necessitate some level of hedge fund regulation.
hedge funds present some level of systemic risk because of the sheer
1 See Wulf A. Kaal, Private Investment Fund Regulation – Theory and Empirical
Evidence from 1998 to 2016 (U of St. Thomas (Minn.) Legal Stud. Res. Paper No.
17-13, 2017); Wulf A. Kaal & Dale A. Oesterle, The History of Hedge Fund
Regulation in the United States (U of St. Thomas (Minn.) Legal Stud. Res. Paper
No. 16-05, 2016); Wulf A. Kaal, The Private Fund Industry Five Years After the
Dodd-Frank Act – A Survey Study, 35(2) REVIEW OF BANKING AND FINANCIAL LAW
624 (2016); Wulf A. Kaal, Barbara Luppi & Sandra Paterlini, Did the Dodd-Frank
Act Impact Hedge Fund Performance? (U of St. Thomas (Minn.) Legal Stud. Res.
Paper No. 14-09, 2014); Wulf A. Kaal, The Impact of Dodd-Frank Act Compliance
Cost on the Hedge Fund Industry (U of St. Thomas (Minn.) Legal Stud. Res. Paper
er No. 14-11, 2014); Wulf A. Kaal, Hedge Fund Manager Registration Under the
Dodd-Frank Act, 50 SAN DIEGO L. REV. 243 (2013); Wulf A. Kaal, Hedge Fund
Regulation via Basel III, 44 VAND. J. TRANSNAT’L L. 389 (2011).; Wulf A. Kaal,
Private Fund Valuation: Retailization, Regulation, and Investor Sustainability, 28
REV. OF BANKING & FIN. L. 581, 581-83 (2009).
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

size of these funds have caused and may cause again disruptions in
the world economy. The demise of Long-Term Capital Management
LLP (LTCM) illustrated the systemic implications of hedge funds.
The LTCM bailout also illustrates that moral hazard problems can
arise with hedge funds. Moral hazard can also occur because high
enforcement costs might make it too costly for the lenders to hedge
funds to prevent moral hazard even when the lender is fully informed
about the hedge fund’s activities.
The lack of transparency and asymmetric information between
regulators and hedge funds is also a significant source of the moral
hazard problem. The asymmetric allocation of information between
regulators and hedge funds is in part prompted by the secrecy under
which hedge funds operate. Their penchant for secrecy originates in
hedge funds’ need to stay competitive to generate the returns
demanded by their clients. The less information the market has about
hedge funds’ activities, the easier it is for them to compete with other
funds. In turn, the greater the secrecy the less the market impact of
funds’ dealing in a particular security, currency or other financial
instrument. The combination of strategies and diverse financial
products allows hedge funds to trade up to the limits of what was
permissible by a given market. National and international regulators
do not have the resources to fully investigate or regulate the activities
of hedge funds. Hedge funds are lobbying to preserve information
asymmetries as far as possible and avoid enhanced transparency.
In order to remedy the unique challenges presented by hedge fund
regulation, regulators appear to be adopting a middle ground by
taking an indirect regulatory approach, which when rigorously
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
applied by banks and financial institutions that are counterparty to
hedge funds can help prevent systemic disruption.
This book chapter evaluates the prevalent regulatory approaches for
hedge funds. Among those are direct regulation, indirect regulation,
so-called prudential hedge fund regulation, and eventually co-
coordinated international co-operation. The chapter shows that
indirect regulation of the hedge fund industry attains most regulatory
objectives while providing the industry with the needed freedoms.
The chapter concludes with an examination of the benefits of indirect
regulation of the hedge fund industry.
II. The Need for Hedge Fund Regulation
The leading case of a hedge fund that affected world markets
illustrates the factors that mandate hedge fund regulation. The demise
of Long Term Capital Management (LTCM) affected the financial
industry at large.
LTCM collapse almost brought world financial markets down
with it. It is the most well publicized case of a hedge fund that got
into severe difficulty when faced with extreme market volatility. 1998
was a tumultuous time for many hedge funds, but LTCM’s collapse in
particular exposed the risks that hedge funds were taking and raised
awareness concerning the risk tolerance of banks, prime brokers and
investors.
The LTCM Cayman Islands fund, Long-Term Capital
Portfolio, LP used trading strategies, which included convergence
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

trading2 and dynamic hedging.3 LTCM held around 80% of the
balance sheet positions in government bonds of G7 countries. Such
positions in government bonds were supported with repo and reverse
repo agreements with a variety of counterparties. LTCM traded on
and off-exchange derivatives in interest rates and equity products and
also engaged in foreign exchange dealing to support these other
activities. LTCM had $4.8 billion in capital prior to the crash and
controlled $160 billion in stocks and bonds. In addition, derivatives of
the fund had a notional value of $1 trillion.
LTCM performed strongly in the bull market of the mid and
late 1990s. It produced returns, net of fees, of approximately 40% in
1995, and slightly less than 20% in 1996 and 1997.4 In 1997, the
managers of the fund increased the fund’s balance sheet leverage by
reducing its capital base by 36% to $4.8 billion rather than increase its
equity positions.5 On January 1, 1998, the fund had a balance sheet
leverage ratio of more than 25 to 1.6
Many of LTCM’s trades went wrong at the same time. It
became obvious that while the fund was diversified in terms of
markets, its overall strategy was not diversified. When the risk
spreads continued to widen, the losses LTCM suffered in individual
2 Wei Xiong, Convergence Trading with Wealth Effects: An Amplification
Mechanism in Financial Markets, 62 Journal of Financial Economics, 247,
247-92 (2001).
3 Simon Benninga & Zvi Wiener, Dynamic Hedging Strategies, 7 Mathematica
in Education and Research, no. 1, 1998, at 12.
4 Philippe Jorion, Risk Management Lessons from Long-Term Capital
Management, 6 EUR. FIN. MGMT. 277, 281-81 (2000); PRESIDENT’S WORKING
GROUP ON FINANCIAL MARKETS, HEDGE FUNDS, LEVERAGE, AND THE LESSONS OF
LONG-TERM CAPITAL MANAGEMENT (1999) [hereinafter President’s Working
Group].
5 Jorion supra note 4 at 281-82 ($4.7B); President’s Working Group supra note 4 at
11.
6 Jorion supra note 4 at 28; President’s Working Group supra note 4 at 12 (“more
than 25-to-1”).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
markets greatly exceeded what conventional risk models suggested
were probable, but these were estimated during more stable periods.
Investors globally sold risky investments for safer ones, liquidity
premiums increased, market liquidity declined and LTCM was unable
to reduce its trading positions. The situation was exacerbated by the
enormous leverage used by the fund in its drive to capture profits
from the smallest market movements.
LTCM’s leverage contributed significantly to its demise.
LTCM´s leverage was achieved in various ways, including
derivatives transactions, short sales, repurchase agreements and direct
financing loans. Its negotiating power led LTCM to increase its
leverage by obtaining favorable terms for these transactions.7 In spite
of the fact that leverage was key to LTCM´s high returns, it also
magnified LTCM´s losses.
Right after the announcement of the Russian debt moratorium
in mid-August 1998,8 investors began to seek superior credit quality
and higher liquidity.9 Hence credit spreads10 widened in markets
7 U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFF., GAO-00-3, LONG-TERM CAPITAL
MANAGEMENT: REGULATORS NEED TO FOCUS GREATER ATTENTION ON SYSTEMIC
RISK 6 (Oct. 1999) [hereinafter U.S. GOVT’ ACCOUNTABILITY OFF.] (Among these
preferential terms were credit enhancements, including re-hypothecation rights, zero
initial margin and two-way collateral requirements.).
8 See President’s Working Group supra note 4 at 12 (“debt moratorium”).
9 See U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFF. supra note 8 at 4 (There are two
separate but related types of liquidity. Funding liquidity is the ability of a hedge
fund to hold its market positions and meet the cash and/or collateral demands
of counterparties, other credit providers and investors. Asset liquidity, on the
other hand, refers to the ability to liquidate an asset quickly, and in large
volume, without substantially affecting the asset´s price. An asset that cannot
be liquidated in a short period of time without substantially affecting the asset´s
price is considered an illiquid instrument.).
10 See President’s Working Group supra note 4 at 14 (A credit spread is the
difference between the yield (the percentage rate of return) of a treasury
security and a non-treasury debt security (e.g. corporate bonds) that are
identical in most respects (particularly the term of the obligation), except with
respect to credit rating.).
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

around the world, creating major losses for LTCM and other market
participants.
The Bank for International Settlements (“BIS”) describes the
events of the summer of 1998 as follows:11
“In mid-August 1998..... financial markets around the globe
experienced extraordinary strains, raising apprehension among market
participants and policy makers of an imminent implosion of the
financial system. As investors appeared to shy away from practically
all types of risk, liquidity dried up in financial markets in both
industrial and emerging economies, and many borrowers were unable
to raise financing even at punitive rates. Prices for all asset classes
except the major industrial country government bonds declined and
issuance of new securities ground to a halt.”12
In August 1998, LTCM suffered losses of US$1.8 billion,
bringing the loss of equity for the year to over 50 percent. As its
condition worsened, LTCM’s credit arrangements became more rigid
and the daily market-to-market valuation for collateral calls became
more contentious.13 Significantly, prior to the crash the banks and
brokers were lending LTCM 100% of the value of collateral for the
fund. When the banks began to make their margin calls the $4.8
billion capital kept in the bank for the purpose of the odd call
dwindled quickly.14
The fund required a large capital injection to stay afloat and
the amount of money that LTCM owed other companies was so large
that these companies may have also been pushed to the edge of
11 BANK FOR INT’L SETTLEMENTS, 69th Annual Report, 43 (June 7, 1999)
[HEREINAFTER BANK FOR INT’L SETTLEMENTS],
https://www.bis.org/publ/ar99e.pdf.
12 Id. at 43.
13 President’s Working Group supra note 4 at 12-13.
14 Id.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
insolvency if LTCM were left to go bankrupt. The positions of a
bankrupt hedge fund are generally liquidated, but the already unstable
world credit markets would have collapsed if lenders sold LTCM’s
collateral to the value of $1 trillion to recoup their costs. After initial
prompting from the Federal Reserve, Wall Street’s elite met and
fourteen firms, such as Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, Salomon
Smith Barney and JP Morgan eventually agreed to participate in a
consortium to bail out LTCM by committing between $100 million to
$350 million each.15 In total, the consortium injected US$3.6 billion
in private equity in the Fund and received a 90% stake in LTCM´s
portfolio and operational control in return.16
1. Industry Practices
LTCM’s demise also illustrates the problem of secrecy in the
industry. LTCM was able to reach its position pre August 1998
because of the degree of secrecy surrounding the business and its
activities. LTCM was considered unique because of the large scale of
its activities and size or its positions in certain markets.17 BIS
considered LTCM to be “market-maker” in some markets.18 LTCM´s
counterparties often treated it more like an investment bank than a
hedge fund. Counterparties were not provided with specific
information regarding the fund’s risk profile in either the balance
sheet or income statements supplied. Long-Term Capital’s strategies
15DANIEL A. STRACHMAN, GETTING STARTED IN HEDGE FUNDS 21 ( 1st ed.
2000).
16 Private–sector Refinancing of the Large Hedge Fund, Long-Term Capital
Management Before the H. Comm. on Banking and Fin. Serv., 105th Cong. 4
(1998) (statement of Alan Greenspan, Chairman, Federal Reserve of the
United States).
17 See U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFF. supra note 7 at 5.
18 See BANK FOR INT’L SETTLEMENTS supra note 11 at 110.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

were supposedly low risk and at the time they would have seemed
conservative to LTCM’s banks.
The LTCM case essentially illustrates the risks in the hedge
fund industry arising from utilizing high leverage, managing very
large positions, inadequate risk management strategies, investor
redemptions, funding liquidity, insufficient monitoring of fund credit
quality by counterparties and insufficient provision of information to
counterparties rendering monitoring ineffective.
The commercial relationships between lenders and hedge
funds were exposed following LTCM’s crash. LTCM made some bad
investment decisions, but Wall Street and the banks also played a
large part in the collapse. Hedge funds are significant clients and
counterparties to banks, particularly because they take on risks that
other financial participants would not, borrow massive amounts and
are willing to pay a premium for borrowing. Therefore, banks
management still view business from hedge funds as desirable.
LTCM grew as large as it did because banks lent it money without
regard for whether this money could be paid back. Banks put their
own existence at risk with their lending practices during this time.
LTCM changed the hedge fund industry practices. A direct
result of the LTCM crisis was a general shift from hedge fund activity
and for those who stayed invested in the industry, towards less risky
forms of hedge funds. Investing became more of a buyer’s market,
which is slowly encouraging a higher degree of information
disclosure, and risk control and risk management have also become a
higher priority for many hedge funds. The amount of leverage used
by hedge fund managers has fallen as a direct result of the LTCM
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
demise.19 This latter factor was due to another important development
in the form of restrictions placed on lending to hedge funds.
While trading desks of major banks and securities firms are
constrained by internal risk management functions, by risk-based
capital requirements and by public disclosure of the firm’s overall
trading activity, hedge funds are subject to fewer public disclosure
requirements and less monitoring. Disclosure by hedge funds to
counterparties and investors are often made by using balance-sheet
concepts, which are not informative about the nature of the exposures
to market risk and credit risk.
2. Regulatory Reactions
In the aftermath of the near-collapse of LTCM and the
prolonged regional economic crises,20 regulators considered if and
how to bring hedge funds under their regulatory authority. Regulators
initially called into question the risk management systems of banks
and securities firms recommended various changes to those practices,
increasing the disclosure requirements applicable to financial
institutions that are counterparties or creditors of hedge funds.21 They
also considered imposing disclosure requirements on hedge funds to
enhance transparency.22
Regulators have assumed that the risk models used by
financial institutions including LTCM do not take the right snapshot
of the economy.23 They recommended changes to the regulatory
19 See President’s Working Group supra note 4 at 31.; Wulf A. Kaal & Timothy A.
Krause, Hedge Funds and Systematic Risk: Handbook on Hedge Funds, 3 (2016).
20 I.e. Asian contagion and Russian debt market.
21 See U.S. GOV’T ACCOUNTABILITY OFF. supra note 7 at 2-3.
22 See President’s Working Group supra note 4 at 31-32.
23 Id. at 29-31.
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

framework as well as the risk models.24 These recommendations
include: improvements in public disclosure by hedge funds through
regulations and legislation,25 and good practices guidelines for foreign
exchange trading;26 stronger counterparty risk management by
institutions providing credit to hedge funds;27 stronger risk
management by all hedge funds;28 enhanced regulatory oversight of
banks and securities firms which provide credit to hedge funds;29 and
finally measures to improve the market infrastructure to facilitate the
liquidation of large leveraged hedge funds.30
The regulatory infrastructure as it existed before LTCM and as
it continue, for the most part, today continues to be subject to
increased scrutiny in the aftermath of the LTCM debacle. Hedge
funds are exempt from U.S. SEC reporting requirements, as well as
from regulatory restrictions on leverage or trading strategies, if they
comply with certain requirements.31 Hedge funds structure and size
of fees is also generally still unsupervised.
III. Regulatory Approaches
The literature on model approaches to hedge fund regulation
identifies four core models: 1. National direct regulation, 2.
24 Id. at 31-32.
25 Id. at 31-33.
26 See Id. at 43.; FABRIZIO SACCOMANNI, MANAGING INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL
INSTABILITY: NATIONAL TAMERS VERSUS GLOBAL TIGERS 64 (2008).
27 President’s Working Group supra note 5 at 31, 34-35.
28 Id. at 31, 34-35.
29 Id. at 34-35.
30 President’s Working Group supra note 4 at A-1-A-2.
31 Kaal, The History of Hedge Fund Regulation in the United States supra note 1 at
5-6.; Kaal, Hedge Fund Manager Registration Under the Dodd-Frank Act supra
note 1 at 9-11.; Kaal, Hedge Fund Valuation: Retailization, Regulation, and Investor
Sustainability supra note 1 at 31-32.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
Prudential regulation, 3. Co-ordinated international cooperation, and
4. Indirect regulation.
1. National Direct Regulation
National direct regulation is the prevailing form of hedge fund
regulation around the world. While most regulators generally favor
letting market forces discipline hedge funds, political and market
pressure to consider approaches for reducing creditor and systematic
risk associated with investments in hedge funds often make direct
regulation a natural choice for regulators. The objective of direct
regulation would be to prevent the excessive expansion in the size and
risk-taking by hedge funds that could lead to disruption in financial
stability. Direct regulatory approaches can involve licensing
requirements, compliance requirements, risk management, fit and
proper tests, and minimum standards for capital, among others.32 The
overarching objective of national direct regulatory approaches is
typically market integrity, transparency, efficiency and the reduction
of systemic risk.33
Competition among regulators can have knock-on effects on
transparency. Information is already flowing more freely between
different national regulators. Multinational institutions like the IMF,
BIS and FSF all play useful part in this, but it is bilateral
communication between national regulators that matters most for
transparency. Co-coordinated international Co-operation, i.e. a global
regulator, would negate this competition between national regulators.
Even if, hypothetically, a global regulator could replace national
32Giorgio Tosetti Dardanelli. Direct or Indirect Regulation of Hedge Funds: A
European Dilemma, 2 EUR. J. OF RISK REG. 463 (2011).
33 Troy A. Paredes, On the Decision to Regulate Hedge Funds: The SEC's
Regulatory Philosophy, Style, and Mission, 2006 U. ILL. L. REV. 975, 975 (2006).
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

regulators it would require a global consensus on what exactly should
be regulated. Given national incoherent political interests and the
problem of uniting them to set up an international body, the idea of a
single global regulator is not on any serious agenda.
Regulators are cognizant of the negative effects of
overregulation.34 The imposition of additional limitations on hedge
funds can impose unwarranted burdens on other types of private
investment pools, such as venture capital funds and structured
financings that do not raise the same concerns as hedge funds in terms
of systemic risk.35
2. Co-coordinated International Co-operation
Policy makers and international policy makers consider
cooperation in hedge fund regulation by way of setting up of an
international body to control worldwide hedge fund investment
strategies and investing. The first and foremost reason for this
initiative is the problem of establishing jurisdiction over hedge funds
as a significant number operate through offshore financial centers.36
And, in turn, imposing national direct regulatory requirements may
drive more hedge funds offshore. U.S. regulators have therefore
called for co-operation and the adoption of international regulatory
standards at least by the key jurisdictions.37
Proponents of this international authority have claimed that
this initiation of a co-operative and comprehensive international co-
34Carl Ackermann, Richard McEnally & David Ravenscraft, The Performance of
Hedge Funds: Risk, Return, and Incentives, 54 THE J. OF FIN. 833, 833-74 (1999).
35 Paredes supra note 33.
36 Wulf A. Kaal, Hedge Fund Regulation via Basel III, 44 VAND. J. TRANSNAT’L L.
389, 389 (2011).
37 Andrew J. Donohue, Dir., Div. of Inv. Mgmt. U.S. SEC, Speech at the Fordham
Journal of Corporate and Financial Law's 3rd Annual Symposium on the Regulation
of Investment Funds: Regulating Hedge Funds and Other Private Investment Pools
(Feb. 19, 2010).
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
coordinated action would ensure proper standards and timely
international surveillance.38 Supposedly, it would also, while
inherently costly, be the most effective way to maintain integrity of
the markets and hedge against the risks posed by hedge funds. It
would further serve the collective interest of the markets, its
intermediaries, investing public and the international community. It
has been conjectured that the objective of such an exercise is not just
to identify weaknesses but also rather to ensure the identified material
weaknesses are addressed in a prompt and effective manner by the
regulators which could ultimately reduce systemic risk to the global
financial system.
Co-coordinated international co-operation may never become a
realistic regulatory option. The administrative costs, the immense
transaction costs as well as the costs of setting up such a venture and,
most importantly, the differing interests especially of off-shore
heavens and, hence, jurisdictional arbitrage will ultimately hinder
such actions.39 The effects of coordinated international cooperation on
the hedge fund industry and world-wide financial markets could also
be significant. Hedge funds may be able to afford to relocate off-
shore with all its detrimental repercussions, i.e. costs, client losses etc.
but certain market segments and jurisdictions will inevitably suffer
when all its hedge funds are forced out.40 Also, the inevitable
restructuring of investment strategies by various hedge funds may
38 Eric Helleiner and Stefano Pagliari., The End of Self-Regulation? Hedge Funds
and Derivatives in Global Financial Governance, in GLOBAL FINANCE IN CRISIS:
THE POLITICS OF INTERNATIONAL REGULATORY CHANGE 123-152 (Eric Helleiner,
Stefano Pagliari & Hubert Zimmermann eds. 2009).
39 Eric Helleiner and Stefano Pagliari, Towards a New Bretton Woods? The First
G20 Leaders Summit and the Regulation of Global Finance, 14 NEW POLITICAL
ECONOMY 275 (2009)7.
40 Eric J. Pan, Challenge of International Cooperation and Institutional Design in
Financial Supervision: Beyond Transgovernmental Networks, 11 CHI. J. INT’L. L.
243 (2010).
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

result in a significant loss of foreign direct investment (FDI) for
various countries participating in the co-coordinated international co-
operation.
3. Prudential hedge fund Regulation
Prudential hedge fund regulation is a combination of indirect
and direct measures intended to enhance regulatory opportunities.
Prudential control measures include improved supervision and
regulation of credit providers, a firmer market infrastructure,
increased disclosure, enhanced national market surveillance and good
practice guidelines for foreign exchange trading.41 Currently, no
precise formula exist for devising effective integrated prudential
hedge fund regulation. Comprehensive prudential controls, are,
according to this model’s assumptions, supposed to cover the entire
process of a transaction and should include controls and systems, risk
management, internal audit and the compliance functions.42 The
model further assumes that effective supervision is considered to
increases the effectiveness of controls on conduct and is therefore
deemed to be one of the major tools employed to prevent systemic
instability in the market.
One of the major constraining factors that constricts effective
prudential supervision of hedge funds is the complex trading-,
investing- and corporate structure of active international hedge funds.
Because of these complex structures, both of hedge funds and
financial intermediaries, most supervisory authorities base their
judgment on rather thin information.
41Lartease Tiffith, Comment, Hedge Fund Regulation: What the FSA Is Doing Right
and Why the SEC Should Follow the FSA's Lead, 27 NW. J. Int'l L. & Bus. 497
(2006).
42 Claudio Borio, Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision
and Regulation?, 49 CESIFO ECON. STUD. 181 (2003).
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
Several improvements are needed for the prudential regulatory
approach. Those include: 1. a multi-dimensional assessment of risks
of intermediaries and supervision of intermediaries on a group basis
rather than as a stand-alone registered entity basis, 2. expansion of
what is being reviewed, e.g. rather than restricting supervision to
merely sales practices, a hedge fund’s controls and systems, risk
management policies and products, conduct, capital adequacy, its
fitness and properness and also systemic implications should be
assessed. Information collection from these supervisory activities
should also be made available to other co-supervisors if legally
permitted.
Transparency is deemed to help improve systemic stability
and effective supervision. The model of prudential regulation assumes
that in order to monitor effectively the financial position of a hedge
fund, a supervisor needs to be able to assess the potential impact of
key affiliates on the registered entity.43 This means, information about
a hedge fund’s conditions, decisions and actions needs to be made
accessible to the supervisor. Additionally, to prevent the build-up of
financial and economic imbalances, the gathered information needs to
be visible and understandable to other regulators and the public.
A broad international effort will need to be initiated for
supervisors to collect and collate consistent, comprehensive
information with adequate disclosure on strategies and system on a
regular and timely basis for dissemination. The use of such an
approach can augment market pressures on intermediaries to
43 Avinash Persaud, Macro-Prudential Regulation Fixing Fundamental Market (and
Regulatory) Failures, World Bank (2009), available at
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/337731468161952385/pdf/503470BRI
0Box31ponse0Note601PUBLIC1.pdf.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

harmonize their disclosures and hopefully, an increase in capital
through competitive and market processes.
The following qualitative regulatory approaches can be
considered when assessing the adequacy of current prudential hedge
fund regulation: 1. Improvements in financial intermediaries` risk
management, 2. Improving the role of regulators in individual firms`
risk management, 3. Improvements in market practice at industry and
firm level, 4. Improved transparency – reporting and disclosure.44
IV. Indirect Regulation
Indirect regulation of hedge funds is a regulatory approach that
emphasizes the regulation of counterparties to hedge funds and
intermediaries rather than hedge funds themselves. By regulating
counterparties and intermediaries, the most critical regulatory issues
may be addressed while not affecting the hedge funds themselves
directly.
Indirect regulation if often the only feasible regulatory tool for
regulators seeking to lower risks associated with the hedge fund
industry and protect investors and markets. In many jurisdictions,
regulators do not have (full) direct regulatory authority over hedge
funds. The regulators can use the regulatory authority over their
respective regulated entities, such as securities regulators over broker-
dealers, prime brokers, material affiliates of broker dealers in order to
regulate hedge funds indirectly. Regulators are also relying on private
sector practices by counterparties and creditors to constrain hedge
funds´ degree of leverage and potential systematic failure. They
recommend that banks and institutional investors tighten credit
44 Erlend W. Nier, Jacek Osinski, Luis I. Jacome, & Pamela Madrid, Towards
Effective Macroprudential Policy Frameworks: An Assessment of Stylized
Institutional Models (IMF Working Paper 11/250 2011).
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
standards, limit counterparty credit exposure, improve procedures for
estimating potential future credit exposures and stress testing and use
collateral.
Indirect regulation may be attaining the best equilibrium of
regulatory practices. Relying on private sector practices by
counterparties and creditors minimizes regulatory expenses
significantly. Indirect regulation enables a state of equilibrium
between costs and attainments of regulatory initiatives. Indirect
regulation allows the hedge fund industry to preserve the necessary
opaqueness of the activities of hedge funds if hedge fund’s
counterparties become the primary regulatory targets. Indirect
regulation helps ensures that hedge funds can continue to operate
world-wide and expose and capitalize on market inefficiencies.
Several downsides and risks exist for the indirect regulation of
the hedge fund industry. The risk management process through which
regulators can regulate banks and hedge funds thereby indirectly
poses a challenge to banks and financial institutions because the
opaqueness of the activities of hedge funds. Regulators who regulate
banks’ risk management processes are in essence asking banks to
fully assess the risks they incur in engaging with hedge funds as their
counterparties. That assessment is often dubious at best. The absence
of a common measure with which to calculate leverage and exposure
and the dynamic nature of hedge funds´ trading strategies is just one
example that shows the incomplete nature of any risk assessment of
hedge funds as counterparties. Competition among creditor banks can
also lead to compromising on important elements of the risk
management process and agreeing to overly generous credit
conditions.
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

1. Fund Regulation via Banking Supervision
Indirect hedge fund regulation via banking supervision is an
approach to hedge fund regulation that focuses on the international
nature of banking regulation as a means of curtailing risks associated
with the international operations of hedge funds as banks’
counterparties. In this context, the capital adequacy standards in the
Basle framework are part of the foundation of the lending practice to
hedge funds and help frame indirect regulatory tools via banking
supervision.
Banking supervision offers several essential benefits for
indirect hedge fund regulation. Information asymmetries and moral
hazard are the major concerns demanding hedge fund regulation.
Banking institutions and other financial intermediaries that make
private loans are well suited to reduce adverse selection and moral
hazard problem in financial markets.45 Banks have particular
advantages over other financial intermediaries in solving asymmetric
information problems.46 They have advantages in preventing risk
taking by borrowers because they can use the threat of cutting off
future lending to improve a borrower’s behavior.47 Banks also have
advantages in reducing moral hazard because they can engage in
lower cost monitoring than can individuals.48 Banks also have
advantages in contracting, i.e. specifying interest rates, collateral
requirements, and other contractual terms that help sort borrowers
45 As pointed out in Edwards and Mishkin (1995), the traditional financial intermediation
role of banking has been in decline in both the United States and other industrialized
countries because of improved information technology that makes issuing securities
easier. Nonetheless, banks continue to be important in the financial system.
46 Frederic S. Mishkin, Prudential Supervision: Why Is It Important and What Are the
Issues?, in PRUDENTIAL SUPERVISION: WHAT WORKS AND WHAT DOES NOT, 4 n. 1
(Frederic S. Mishkin ed., 2001).
47 See Joseph E. Stiglitz & Andrew Weiss, Incentive Effects of Terminations: Applications
to the Credit and Labor Markets, 73 AM. ECON. REV. 912, 912 (1983).
48 See Douglas W. Diamond, Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring, 51
REV. OF ECON. STUD. 393, 393 (1984).
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
into risk pools that reduce adverse selection and moral hazard
incentives for borrowers to engage in risky activities. Furthermore,
banks` advantages in information collection activities are enhanced
by their ability to engage in long-term customer relationships and to
issue loans using lines of credit arrangements.49 Moreover, banks`
ability to scrutinize their borrowers` checking account balances
provides them with an additional advantage in monitoring the
borrowers` behavior.50
2. Capital Adequacy Standards
Capital adequacy standards and their regulatory influence on
the credit market and credit policies of banks and hedge funds play an
increasingly important role for indirect hedge fund regulation. The
Basel framework provides several core benefits for indirect regulation
of the hedge fund industry. The Basel framework aligns regulatory
capital requirements more closely with underlying risks, and provides
banks and their supervisors with several options for the assessment of
capital adequacy.51
The Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (the
principles)52 represent a global standard for prudential regulation and
supervision of banks. It presents a comprehensive set of twenty-five
49 See Allen N. Berger & Gregory F. Udell, Did Risk-Based Capital Requirements
Allocate Bank Credit and Cause a „Credit Crunch“ in the United States?, 26 J. MONEY,
CREDIT & BANKING 585, 588 (1994).
50 Leonard I. Nakamura, Commercial Bank Information: Implications fort he Structure of
Banking, in STRUCTURAL CHANGE FOR BANKING 131-60 (M. Klausner & L.J. White eds.,
1993).
51 Linda E. Rappaport, Global Financial Regulatory Reform Proposals, in PRAC. L.
INST., TAX LAW AND ESTATE PLANNING COURSE HANDBOOK SERIES:
TAX LAW AND PRACTICE: HOT ISSUES IN EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
83, 85 (2010).
52 Basel Committee on Baking Supervision, Core principles for effective banking
supervision, BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS (1997), available at
https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbsc102.pdf.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Core Principles that have been developed by the Basle Committee53
as a basic reference for effective banking supervision. The Basel
Committee designed the principles to be applied by all member
countries in the supervision of the banks in their jurisdictions. The
vast majority of member countries have endorsed the principles and
implement them. The Basel Committee sees the formulation of the
Core Principles Methodology as an iterative process, with refinements
made as experience is gained.54 The Core Principles are being
updated periodically to encapsulate developments in regulatory and
supervisory standards and procedures.
The Core Principles may be the groundwork of effective
banking supervision and there may be various overlaps with the New
Capital Adequacy Framework, i.e. various principles in the New
Framework are closely linked to criteria for assessment of compliance
with the Core Principles in the area of Capital Adequacy. Yet, the
New Framework, which, adopted by more than one hundred
countries, is important for indirect hedge fund regulation.
The Basle Committee on Banking Supervision issued on 16th
January 2001 a proposal for a New Basle Capital Accord dubbed
Basle II55 that, once finalized, will replace the 1988 Accord
(“Accord”). Basle II outlines a series of measures which, taken
collectively, amount to a fundamental revision to the Committee’s
53 Id. The aim of the Core Principles is to strengthen financial systems of countries
to prevent global economic instability through effective banking supervision. The
principles relate to: preconditions to effective banking supervision, licensing and
structure, prudential regulations and requirements, methods of ongoing banking
supervision, information requirements, formal powers of supervisors, and cross-
border banking.
54 Basel Committee on Baking Supervision, Core principles for effective banking
supervision, BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS (2012), available at
https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs230.pdf
55 Basel Committee on Baking Supervision, Core principles for effective banking
supervision, BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS (2001).
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
1988 Accord.56 The New Basle Capital Accord is more extensive and
complex than the 1988 Accord. But the complexity of the new
framework could be perceived as a natural reflection of the
advancement and innovations in the financial marketplace and the
need for a more risk-sensitive framework.57 Intended only to apply to
internationally active banks, and representing an informal agreement
between the central banks and bank supervisory agencies of the G –10
countries, the 1988 Accord has since become accepted as the de facto
universal standard for assessing banks´ capital adequacy. Thus, a
proposal to revise the Accord is a matter of immense significance for
the international financial system. The new framework, however, is
intended to align regulatory capital requirements more closely with
underlying risks, and to provide banks and their supervisors with
several options for the assessment of capital adequacy. The
Committee’s objective was to lay the groundwork for a flexible
capital adequacy framework that has the capacity to adapt to changes
in the financial system and will enhance safety and soundness.58
The proposal is based on three mutually reinforcing pillars
that allow banks and supervisors to evaluate properly the various risks
that banks face. The New Basle Capital Accord focuses on: minimum
capital requirements, which seek to refine the measurement
framework set out in the Accord; supervisory review of an
institution's capital adequacy and internal assessment process; and
56 Basel Committee on Baking Supervision, Core principles for effective banking
supervision, BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS (1999), available at
https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs107.pdf
57 Id.
58 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Core principles for effective banking
supervision, BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL SETTLEMENTS (2004) Available
at https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs107.pdf.
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

market discipline, through effective disclosure to encourage safe and
sound banking practices.
When discussing the New Capital Adequacy Framework,
dubbed “Basle II” and its successor “Basel III”, from the perspective
of hedge fund regulation, it is important to understand the historical
events and pressures under which they were developed. The final
stages of the New Framework’s preparation began in the aftermath of
the rescue operation for LTCM and the turbulence in financial
markets, which followed the Russian government’s forced
restructuring of its own short-term debt and its moratorium on the
servicing of a wide range of private-sector external obligations in
August 1998. Accordingly, Basle II was, at least partly, motivated by
the events surrounding LTCM and, therefore, by the same concerns
and problems.
V. Conclusion
The Basel Framework attains the desired incomplete
regulation as a regulatory minimum standard. Moreover, the
Framework provides a voluntary standard. Investor and creditor
relations are improved by enhanced transparency and reliability.
Participating banks reinforce the relation with its creditors and, hence,
hedge funds. The three pillars of Basle II and its successors, constitute
a set of rules applicable to financial intermediaries i.e. banks which
indirectly regulate hedge funds. Applying the Basel Framework to
hedge fund regulation is in conformity with the requirements of
incomplete contract theory.
Indirect regulation of hedge funds removes the problem of
lacking jurisdictional authority and, thus, jurisdictional arbitrage. The
Basel Framework is a framework for banks worldwide. The Basel
Framework is a single unilateral Framework that enhances
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
transparency and lowers transactions costs by replacing various
national frameworks that would otherwise be necessary.
Indirect regulation enables the hedge fund industry to avoid
costs by implementing their own risk monitoring systems and
measurements. Accordingly, indirect regulation helps address the
danger that hedge funds might not be sufficiently profitable to justify
their 2/20 fee structure to clients.
Moral hazard and associated systemic risks are addressed by
indirect regulation. Systemic risk problems are addressed because the
Basel Framework regulates the credit standards of banks but
indirectly also hedge funds’ level of leverage. Hence, credit markets
are saver. Moral hazard problems are addressed because the Basel
Framework guarantees, by introducing market discipline, internal
ratings and supervisory review, a change in lending practice and
disclosure. This, in turn, will further decrease the capital – leverage
ratio of hedge funds. Hence, moral hazard problems comparable to
the LTCM case are less likely to occur. Fewer moral hazard
problems, in turn, have a knock-on effect on the fee structure of
hedge funds and the associated milder moral hazard problems. Moral
hazard is also addressed because under the Basel Framework banks
calibrate, at least partly, their own risk with their own risk
measurement tools and ex post opportunism of hedge funds is less
likely considering that not only hedge funds but also their financial
intermediaries are endangered to lose their reputation and market
position in case it transpired that their risk evaluation of a
counterparty hedge fund is insufficient. The Basel Framework
provides adequate protection against opportunism by enhancing
banks` review of counterparty risk.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Indirect regulation via capital adequacy under the Basel
Framework also helps to address problems with asymmetric
allocation of information between regulators and the hedge fund
industry. The third pillar under Basel II provides that disclosure
requirements and recommendations are set out, which will allow
market participants to assess critical information describing the risk
profile and capital adequacy of banks. Those risk profiles cover hedge
fund exposures and their credit lines. Thus, hedge fund’s dependency
on banks and other financial intermediaries will enable banks to
negotiate terms in a more favorable way when faced with critical
financial scenarios. Negotiations, in turn, are likely to decrease
information asymmetries.
The Basel Framework facilitates considerable advantages in
the internal ratings-based approach, under which capital requirements
would be set on the basis of a bank’s own quantitative and qualitative
assessment of its credit risk. This is especially effective in terms of
addressing problems of asymmetric information. For instance,
internal ratings may incorporate supplementary information about
borrowers that is usually beyond the reach of institutions providing
external credit assessments, and may cover a much broader range of
borrowers. This information, in turn, may be made accessible to other
financial intermediaries and investors. Information asymmetries are,
thus, minimized.
The internal rating-based approach under the Basel
Framework also incentivizes banks to undertake further development
of their internal techniques for managing and measuring credit risk
which would have knock-on effects on hedge funds. On the other
hand, however, hedge funds need to remain in secrecy because the
less information the market has about hedge fund’s activities, the
easier it is for them to stay profitable.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

Chapter 22: Indirect Regulation
Indirect regulation of the hedge fund industry balances
regulatory objectives with industry needs. A preferable regulatory
solution allows hedge funds to remain in secrecy while addressing
information asymmetries. Indirect hedge fund regulation via the Basel
Framework addresses information asymmetries. At the same time,
under an indirect regulatory approach, hedge funds can remain
exempt from disclosure and transparency requirements. Only
financial intermediaries are required to unveil that information.
Indirect regulation via the Basel Framework also addresses the
major constraining factors on effective supervision such as the
complex trading-, investing- and corporate structure of active
international hedge funds. The Basel Framework is extended on a
consolidated basis to holding companies of banking groups in order to
ensure that risks within the entire banking group are considered.
Accordingly, it addresses these complex structures, both of hedge
funds and financial intermediaries, allowing most supervisory
authorities to base their judgment on improved information.
Indirect regulation of hedge funds via the banking supervision
in the Basel Framework also removes the need for joint regulatory
action and individual regulators’ transaction costs and implementation
costs. An international framework such as the Basel Framework does
not to require more than one implementation. It is then the
responsibility of the participating banks to comply with the
framework. Hence, implementation and transactions costs for national
regulators can be avoided.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3405660

