U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
BLOCKCHAIN INNOVATION IN PRIVATE INVESTMENT
FUNDS
-
A COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE UNITED STATES
AND EUROPE
Wulf A. Kaal* & Marco Dell’Erba **
Abstract
The use of blockchain technology in private investment funds is
proliferating. Using a dataset of private investment fund advisers that utilize
blockchain technology (N=120), we explore the core commonalities and
differences in the use of blockchain technology between European and
American fund advisers.
The data analysis in this article suggests that the market for private
investment funds who invest in- and utilize blockchain technology appears to
be near equally divided between the US and the EU, with Russia and China
playing significant roles. We interpret parts of the data as suggesting that larger
private investment fund advisers in Europe may be more willing to make the
required investments into blockchain infrastructure whereas in the US the
legacy systems utilized by larger private investment fund advisers create
barriers to entry for larger advisers to invest in- and utilize blockchain
technology. Larger European fund advisers use the technology predominantly
to invest in- and secure crypto assets whereas American fund advisers appear
to use the smart contracting features of the technology more frequently to build
more advanced crypto businesses and business structures via blockchain
technology.
While the overall proportion of strategies of private investment funds
that utilize modern technologies, including blockchain technology, is still
small, as the private investment fund industry’s use of blockchain technology
grows and accelerates, the innovation benefits for private investment funds and
their clients promise lasting change for the industry.
Key Words: Blockchain, Distributed Ledger Technology, Artificial
Intelligence, Machine Learning, Data Science, Data Scientists, Meta Models,
Innovation, Entrepreneur, Startup, Big Data, Private Investment Funds, Hedge
Funds, Private Equity, Diversification, Compliance, Optimization, Efficiency
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O32
* Associate Professor, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis), United
States of America.
** Post-Doctoral Fellow, Groningen Center for European Financial Services Law
(University of Groningen), Research Associate, LabEx ReFi (ENA, ESCP, Paris I
Panthéon-Sorbonne, CNAM).
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Table of Content
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................. 3
II. BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY ............................................................. 5
1. Distributed Consensus .................................................................. 7
2. Smart Contracting ......................................................................... 9
III. REGULATORY RECOGNITION OF BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY ........ 11
1. European Union .......................................................................... 12
2. United States ............................................................................... 15
IV. PRIVATE INVESTMENT FUNDS’ USE OF BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY
21
1. United States ............................................................................... 22
2. Europe ......................................................................................... 24
V. DATA ............................................................................................... 27
VI. DISCUSSION ..................................................................................... 35
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
I. Introduction
The disruptive properties of Blockchain technology have the
potential to transform a significant part of the financial services sector.
Blockchain is a distributed database1 capable of holding a secure and
immutable record of past transactions that is quickly adaptable to a
broad range of activities and objectives.2 The World Economic Forum
(WEF) referred to Distributed Ledger Technology (DLT) as a
technology “that will form the foundation of next generation financial
services infrastructure.”3 Data on blockchain technology collected by
the WEF between 2013-2016 suggests over $1.4 billion venture capital
investments in the industry; more than 2,500 DLT patent applications;
more than 24 countries currently investing in DLT; more than 90 central
banks engaged in DLT discussions worldwide; more than 90
corporations have joined DLT consortia; and 80% of banks are
predicted to initiate a DLT project by 2017.4
Financial services’ infrastructure cost savings associated with
blockchain technology are significant. Although the majorit of
blockchain applications has been developed in the context post-trading
market operations,5 blockchain has the potential to replace a significant
proportion of existing manual processes, where information needs to be
1 See Satoshi Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer Electronic cash system (November
2008), available at https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf
2 Charles Brennan & William Lunn, Blockchains, The Trust Disrupter, 3 August 2016,
available at https://www.finextra.com/finextra-downloads/newsdocs/document-
1063851711.pdf. On the regulation of disruptive technology, see Mark Fenwick Wulf
A. Kaal & Erik P.M. Vermeulen, Regulation Tomorrow: What Happens When
Technology is Faster than the Law? (September 4, 2016), Lex Research Topics in
Corporate Law & Economics Working Paper No. 2016-8; U of St. Thomas
(Minnesota) Legal Studies Research Paper No. 16-23; TILEC Discussion Paper No.
2016-024; available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=2834531 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2834531
3 World Economic Forum, The future of financial infrastructure An ambitious look at
how blockchain can reshape financial services (2016), available at
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_future_of_financial_infrastructure.pdf.
4 Id.
5 ECB, Distributed Ledger Technology (2016), available at
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/pdf/infocus/20160422_infocus_dlt.pdf: “keeping
accounts at the top-tier level (depositary/registrar service) and at lower level (custody
service); checking the entitlement of an investor to the control of an asset (know-your-
customer and antimoney-laundering obligations); transmitting and reconciling
transfer orders prior to settlement (clearing function); facilitating settlement and
hedging settlement risk until the transfer of funds and securities are final and
enforceable (netting and risk management); discharging participants’ obligations
through the transfer of funds and securities (settlement function); ensuring the
integrity of an issuance and avoiding the unwarranted creation of securities (notary
function); avoiding theft of private information, malicious updates and the denial of
service (cybersecurity); and managing events initiated by an issuer of securities and
their impact on end investors (asset servicing)”.
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
communicated and stored but is prone to human error.6 Facilitated by
its potential to eliminate market intermediaries7 and create new
foundations for economic and social systems,8 blockchain technology is
an important example of a disruptive technology that can create new
market structures. By 2022 Santander estimates $20 billion per year in
savings for the US banking system will be attributable to blockchain
technology because of the reduction of banks’ infrastructure costs
associated with cross-border payments, securities trading, and
regulatory compliance.9
Private investment funds in Europe and the United States play a
major role in the evolution of blockchain technology in the financial
sector. Private investment funds have invested earlier in the blockchain
sector than other financial players. Because of legacy systems in the
private investment fund infrastructure, the proportion of private
investment funds that invest in blockchain technology is still small as a
proportion of all private investment fund investments in technology.
However, a growing subgroup of private investment funds is embracing
blockchain and smart contracts (as well as artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning that are beyond the scope of this article).
Private investment funds benefit from blockchain in multiple
and often parallel ways. While some funds use the technology for the
purpose of investing in crypto-currencies or indirectly making profits
investing in blockchain start-up companies, other private investment
funds are investing in start-up companies with the purpose to internalize
the new technological applications within their business model. By
optimizing their internal processes via blockchain technology, smaller
investment fund managers gain unprecedented opportunities to compete
with more established fund managers in markets that were previously
dominated by larger players. Moreover, consistenly with the general
trends of market fragmentation and disintermediation, smaller private
investment fund managers started to erode the power of established
market institutions such as banks and insurance companies.
This article evaluates the comparative differences between
European and American private investment funds that invest in
blockchain technology. To provide an overview of the findings, the
6 ASTRI, Whitepaper On Distributed Ledger Technology (November 2016), 71,
available at http://www.hkma.gov.hk/media/eng/doc/key-functions/finanical-
infrastructure/Whitepaper_On_Distributed_Ledger_Technology.pdf.
7 Philipp Paech, Securities, Intermediation and the Blockchain - An Inevitable Choice
between Liquidity and Legal Certainty? Uniform Law Review (2016) 21 (4), available
at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2697718 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2697718.
8 Marco Iansiti & Karim R. Lakhani, The Truth About Blockchain, Harv. Bus. Rev.
(Jan.–Feb. 2017), available at https://hbr.org/2017/01/the-truth-about-blockchain..
9 Santander Innoventures & Oliver Wyman, The Fintech 2.0 Paper: rebooting
financial services (2015), available at http://santanderinnoventures.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/The-Fintech-2-0-Paper.pdf.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
market for private investment funds investing in- and implementing
blockchain technology appears to be near equally divided between
Europe and US, with China and Russia emerging as significant players.
An analysis of the data related to the two markets reveals specific traits
and differences, both in terms of categories and dimensions of private
funds investing in blockchain. While in the US the majority of private
funds is homogenously distributed among the major asset classes (hedge
funds, private equity funds, venture capitals), in Europe a clear
predominance of venture capitals emerges. In addition, the size of
private funds significantly diverges in the two geographic areas: the
European market is characterized by more established and larger private
funds, whereas the American market benefits from the presence of
smaller and potentially more innovative funds. This could be affected
by Europe larger private investment fund advisers’ willingness to make
the required investments into a blockchain infrastructure. Whereas in
the US the legacy systems utilized by larger private investment fund
advisers create barriers to entry for larger private investment fund
advisers to invest in- and utilize blockchain techonology. Nonetheless,
the majority of the private fund advisers in both EU and US invest in
blockchain technology to gain exposure to crypto assets, as a potential
source of exponential returns.
II. Blockchain Technology
Blockchain is a specific type of DLT. While in a normal
distributed ledger, records are stored in a continuous ledger,10
blockchain is structured as a series of blocks securely chained
together,11 where each block contains a collection of transactions.
Starting from the first block in the ledger, the “Genesis block,” each new
block is appended and thereby forms a chain.12 That blockchain
represents the chronological order of the transactions13 via complex
cryptography that secures the integrity of the data. The resulting chain
forms a register of transactions as the official record14: all transactions
10 See UK Government Chief Scientific Adviser, Distributed Ledger Technology:
beyond block chain(2016), 17, available at
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/49297
2/gs-16-1-distributed-ledger-technology.pdf
11 ASTRI, supra note 66, 5.
12 Id.
13 ECB, supra note 5, 1.
14 Id. See also Andrea Pinna & Wiebe Ruttenberg, Distributed ledger technologies in
securities post-trading, ECB Occasional papers n. 172/April 2016, 8, available at
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecbop172.en.pdf: “Some of the
characteristic features of DLTs can be found in earlier database technologies that
have been developed since the 1990s, e.g. in the field of master replication. These
technologies allow a number of parties to update records in a common database, with
conflicts being resolved by some form of consensus algorithm. It is possible that there
will be a renewal of interest in technologies of this type, as a result of the current focus
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
are immutably stored in that ledger, which is replicated among all
validating nodes.15
Numerous definitions of DLTs have been elaborated in different
contexts and there is no one common accepted legal definition.16
Among others, IOSCO defines DLT as “a consensus of replicated,
shared, and synchronized digital data geographically spread across
multiple sites, countries, and/or institutions. DLT are technologies used
to implement distributed ledgers”.17 Regardless of the legal definition,
DLT is a combination of peer-to-peer networking, distributed data
storage and cryptography.18
Blockchain has been defined by Vitalik Buterin, founder of
Ethereum, as follows: “Public blockchains: a public blockchain is a
blockchain that anyone in the world can read, anyone in the world can
send transactions to and expect to see them included if they are valid,
and anyone in the world can participate in the consensus process — the
process for determining what blocks get added to the chain and what
the current state is. As a substitute for centralized or quasi-centralized
trust, public blockchains are secured by crypto economics — the
combination of economic incentives and cryptographic verification
using mechanisms such as proof of work or proof of stake, following a
general principle that the degree to which someone can have an
influence in the consensus process is proportional to the quantity of
economic resources that they can bring to bear. These blockchains are
generally considered to be “fully decentralized”.”19
on shared databases (and distributed ledgers), and that they will, as a result, be
updated and come to represent a competing alternative to DLTs. They could allow
otherwise traditional databases designed to be shared among financial institutions to
be updated non-centrally”.
15 ASTRI, supra note 66, 19.
16 David Mills et al., Distributed ledger technology in payments, clearing, and
settlement (2016), Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-095. Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, available at
https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.095.
17 IOSCO, Research Report on Financial Technologies (Fintech) (Feb. 2017), 51,
available at https://www.iosco.org/library/pubdocs/pdf/IOSCOPD554.pdf.
18 David Mills et Al., supra note 16..
19 Vitalik Buterin, On Public and Private Blockchains, ETHEREUM BLOG
(Aug.7,2015), available at https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/08/07/on-public-and-
private-blockchains/, contrasting public blockchains (the original idea) with
consortium blockchains and fully private blockchains: “Consortium blockchains: a
consortium blockchain is a blockchain where the consensus process is controlled by a
pre-selected set of nodes; for example, one might imagine a consortium of 15 financial
institutions, each of which operates a node and of which 10 must sign every block in
order for the block to be valid. The right to read the blockchain may be public, or
restricted to the participants, and there are also hybrid routes such as the root hashes
of the blocks being public together with an API that allows members of the public to
make a limited number of queries and get back cryptographic proofs of some parts of
the blockchain state. These blockchains may be considered ‘partially decentralized.’”
Id. “Fully private blockchains: a fully private blockchain is a blockchain where write
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
The ledger aspect of blockchain technology is key. Similar to
accounting ledgers, electronic ledgers are updated whenever a
transaction takes place. However, while accounting ledgers are
overwritten, in the context of DLT the nodes (the system participants)
exchange the transaction information that is subsequently added as a
new ledger entry.20 In addition, different from accounting ledgers,
electronic ledgers are “collectively maintained”21 by a shared or
distributed network of participants.22 Typically, the distributed network
is a “peer-to-peer” (P2P) network, where each connected computer is a
“peer” node,23 that joins “the network by connecting to one of the well-
known peers, whose information has been made public. It then learns
about other peers through the information received from this well-
known node. At the same time, other nodes learn about this new node.”24
Distributed networks disintermediate. The intermediation of a
centralized validation entity (a central bank or a clearing-house) in
charge of recording and validating the transactions is not necessary in a
decentralized network.25 Therefore, the framework implemented with
DLTs is often referred as “decentralized.”26 DLT users can “store and
access information relating to a given set of assets and their holders in a
shared database of either transactions or account balances.”27
Information is distributed among users, who can implement a wide
range of actions, without a trusted central counterparty acting as a
validator.28
1. Distributed Consensus
In the decentralized DLT model, “distributed consensus”
replaces the trusted central validation system.29 Consensus is a set of
rules and procedures regulating the process by which the majority, or
permissions are kept centralized to one organization. Read permissions may be public
or restricted to an arbitrary extent. Likely applications include database management,
auditing, etc [sic] internal to a single company, and so public readability may not be
necessary in many cases at all, though in other cases public auditability is desired.” On
the definition of private and public blockchain see also, FINRA, Distributed Ledger
Technology: Implications of Blockchain for the Securities Industry (Jan. 2017),
available at https://www.finra.org/sites/default/files/FINRA_Blockchain_Report.pdf.
20 ASTRI, supra note 6, 10.
21 Id.
22 ESMA, The Distributed Ledger Technology Applied to Securities Markets (Feb. 7,
2017), available at https://www.esma.europa.eu/sites/default/files/library/dlt_report_-
_esma50-1121423017-285.pdf (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
23 ASTRI, supra note 6, 10
24 Id.
25 ESMA, supra note 22.
26 Vitalik Buterin, supra note 19.
27 Pinna & Ruttenberg, supra note 6, 8.
28 & Id.
29 ASTRI, supra note 6, 10.
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
also the totality, of the networks validators reach an agreement on the
state of a ledger, contributing to maintain “coherent set of facts between
multiple participating nodes.” 30 The process of consensus can vary: in
the context of Bitcoin, the “longest chain” – the chain with the most
proof-of-work – is considered to be the valid ledger.”31 DLT users reach
consensus on a particular version of the distributed ledger, namely on
the sequential order of transactions, with the consequence that “there
cannot be any doubt as to the users’ respective holdings,” replacing a
central validation with “a set of cryptographic32 solutions and economic
incentives that combine to prevent illicit updates and reconcile
discrepancies.”33
In the process of “distributed consensus”, two phases can be
distinguished: (i) validation of each transaction and (ii) the “broadcast”
of the validated result to all nodes validates the other nodes of the
distributed ledger.34 In the first phase, the nodes establish whether or
not new entries in a transaction block are valid. The nodes also validate
that the transaction block can be admitted to the ledger. Validating every
transaction in the block ensures that the contents are legitimate.35 In the
second phase of “broadcast & Consensus,” validating nodes agree on a
consistent view of the new entry in the distributed ledger.36 It begins
when a validating node has validated one or more transactions and
initiates the process of adding them to the ledger. The validating node
first broadcasts information about the new block to the other validating
nodes. The other validating nodes may also have validated the same set
or different sets of transactions, but the consensus process allows them
to communicate among themselves and agree on a common set of
validated transactions to be added to the ledger.37 The ledger can thus
30 Tim Swanson, Consensus-as-a-service: a brief report on the emergence of
permissioned, distributed ledger systems, (Apr. 6, 2015), available at
http://www.ofnumbers.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Permissioned-distributed-
ledgers.pdf (last visited Jul. 11, 2017)
31 Id. “There are multiple alternative consensus mechanisms which have been
developed over the past three decades. For instance, the Dijkstra Prize is an annual
award for academic research on distributed computing. Some of the ideas and
innovations from these proceedings have influenced both distributed databases which
require fault tolerance (e.g., Paxos from Leslie Lamport) and distributed economic
consensus methods. The primary distinction between the former and latter is that of
maturity in formalization, analysis and implementation”
32 Cryptography encompasses “computer-based encryption techniques such as
public/private keys and hash functions, to store assets and validate transactions”. See
ESMA, see supra note 22.
33 Andrea Pinna & Wiebe Ruttenberg, supra note 14, 9.
34 ASTRI, supra note 6, 10.
35 Id. Such validation may consist in verifying that “the sender of a transaction is the
true owner of the asset being sold. For transactions containing a contract execution
instruction, validating nodes will also execute the instruction that has been received
and confirmed by the consensus process”.
36 ASTRI, supra note 6, 10.
37 Id.
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
be considered authoritative, although its management is shared among
users with conflicting incentives.38
DLT uses digital signature technology. In order to verify the
authenticity of transactions over the network and to further increase its
security, DLT applies digital signature technology. The technology is a
derivation of public-key-cryptography,39 an asymmetric key
cryptography, and serves to certify the authenticity of transactions.40
The digital signature is based on three algorithms. First, via a key
generation algorithm, a person concurrently generates a private signing
key and public verification key, where a relationship exists between the
two, and the private key may not be derived from the public key.41
Second, a signing algorithm hashes the message and binds the private
key of the sending party to the message.42 Third, a signature verification
algorithm uses the public key to ensure the corresponding private key
was used to sign the digest,43 with the consequence that anyone trying
to sign the transaction using a different private key will be detected as
bogus.44
2. Smart Contracting
Through DLT platforms it is possible to implement “smart
contracts.45 Smart contracts “combine protocols with user interfaces to
formalize and secure relationships over computer networks.”46 They
38 Pinna & Ruttenberg, supra note 14, 8: “Sharing a database with no central
validation system can create difficulties when different users have conflicting
incentives. Due to the latency of communication via a network, a malicious user may
lead a counterparty to believe that some cash/securities have been credited to its
account, whilst other users believe these same assets to be recorded in another account
– which might be that of the malicious user or of a third user.5 A similarly undesirable
outcome might also arise when a dysfunction in the entry of information by a bona fide
user in the network results in inconsistent information being recorded in the copies of
the ledger held by the various users. Before all distributed copies of the ledger have
been reconciled, the beneficiary of a transaction may perform what erroneously
appears to be a delivery-versus-payment. There needs to be a way of avoiding or
addressing such errors, and thus achieving consistency across different copies of the
ledger”.
39 Brennan & Lunn, supra note 2..
40 ASTRI, supra note 6, 26.
41 Brennan & Lunn, supra note 2..
42 Id.
43 Id.
44 ASTRI, supra note 6, 26.
45 The term “smart contract” was first introduced by Nick Szabo, a computer scientist
and legal theorist, in 1994. See Nick Szabo, Smart Contracts: The Blockchain
Technology That Will Replace Lawyers (1994),
BLOCKGEEKS, http://blockgeeks.com/guides/smart-contracts/ (last visited Jul. 11,
2017)
46 Nick Szabo, Formalizing and Securing Relationships on Public Networks, First
Monday, Volume 2, Number 9 - 1 September 1997, available at
http://ojphi.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/548/469.
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
are pre-written logic computer programs47 that can be impartially
executed by DLT itself48 e.g. by DLT validating nodes.49 The coded
terms in smart contracts are a set of pre-defined terms and execution
conditions that are agreed upon ex-ante by all relevant parties. One or a
series of specific events trigger the transaction50 without relying on a
central authority.51 A smart contract is executed by transferring the
value between the contract signing parties52 when the transaction is
triggered, and its settlement – the settlement of both on-chain assets and
off-chain assets.53 In smart contracts, two further typical elements are
multi-signature (or multi-sig) and oracles. The former guarantees the
approval of transactions by two or more parties “before funds can be
released or some other aspect of the contract can move forward.”54 The
latter serves to monitor and provide support regarding external input,
including, inter alia, prices, performance, or some other aspect of the
real world.55
Smart contracts may have different degrees of complexity, from
the simple purchase of music through Apple’s i Tunes platform56 or a
travel reservations57, to derivative contracts.58 Complex smart contracts
involving several parties need to rely on a verifiable and unhackable
system provided by blockchain technology. Through blockchain
47 IOSCO, supra note 17, 51.
48 ASTRI, supra note 6.
49 Id.
50 Id.
51 See CAPGEMINI, Smart Contracts in Financial Services: Getting from Hype to
Reality (2017), available at https://www.capgemini-consulting.com/resource-file-
access/resource/pdf/smart-contracts.pdf.
52 Id.: “Multisig allows two or more parties to the contract to approve the execution of
a transaction independently – a key requirement for multi-party contracts”.
53 ASTRI, supra note 6, 27.
54 Houman Shadab, What Are Smart Contracts, and What Can We do with them?(15
December 2014), available at https://coincenter.org/entry/what-are-smart-contracts-
and-what-can-we-do-with-them (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
55 See Houman Shadab, supra note 64, and CAPGEMINI, supra note 61.
56 See Wulf A. Kaal, Blockchain Applications and Fee Structure Developments in
Private Investment Funds (April 27, 2017), available
at https://ssrn.com/abstract=2959730 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2959730. See,
e.g., Horsten Koeppl & Jeremy Kronik, BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY—
WHAT’S IN STORE FOR CANADA’S ECONOMY AND FINANCIAL MARKETS? 15
(2017), available at
https://www.cdhowe.org/sites/default/files/attachments/research_papers/mixed/Com
mentary_468_0.pdf; R. Douglas Vaugh & Anna Outzer, Understanding How the
Block Chain Could Impact the Legal Industry, LAW 360 (Jan. 11, 2017), available at
https://www.law360.com/articles/879810/understanding-how-blockchain-
couldimpact-
legal-industry.
57 See Shadab, supra note 64.
58 Houman B. Shadab, Regulating Bitcoin and Block Chain Derivatives, NYLS Legal
Studies Research Paper(October 9, 2014), available
at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2508707.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
technology, smart contracting often makes legal contracting
unnecessary as smart contracts often emulate the logic of legal contract
clauses. Ethereum, the leading platform for smart contracting, describes
smart contracting in this context as follows:
Ethereum is a decentralized platform that runs smart contracts:
applications that run exactly as programmed without any possibility of
downtime, censorship, fraud or third party interference. These apps run
on a custom built blockchain, an enormously powerful shared global
infrastructure that can move value around and represent the ownership
of property. This enables developers to create markets, store registries
of debts or promises, move funds in accordance with instructions given
long in the past (like a will or a futures contract) and many other things
that have not been invented yet, all without a middle man or
counterparty risk.59
III. Regulatory Recognition of Blockchain Technology
The lack of regulatory recognition of Blockchain technology
creates significant uncertainty for the blockchain community and
undermines the evolution of the crypto economy. The lacking
recognition hinders the implementation of the technology across
industries and undermines the infrastructure conversion via blockchain
technology. The regulatory uncertainty derives from insufficient or non-
existent regulatory guidance, lacking court decisions, and uncertainty
over applicable jurisdiction.
American and European courts have not yet recognized
blockchain technology or addressed its applications.. A review of
published court opinions suggests that no court at the time of publication
of this article had to review, assess, or scrutinize the uses and
applications of blockchain technology.60 It is unclear how courts may
perceive and treat blockchain technology.61
59 ETHEREUM, https://www.ethereum.org/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017)
60 A search of “blockchain” or “block chain” in federal and state cases on Westlaw
reveals that only two cases have mentioned blockchain technology. The courts in both
cases refused to discuss blockchain in depth, and did not take a position on the
legitimacy of the technology. See In re Dole Food Co., Inc. Stockholder Litigation,
C.A. No. 8703–VCL, 2017 WL 624843 at n. 1 (Del. Ch. Feb. 15, 2017); United States
v. Petix, 15-CR-227A, 2016 WL 7017919 (W.D. N.Y. Dec. 1, 2016). A search of
“blockchain’’, “block chain”, “dispositif d’enregistrement electronique partagé” on
DeJure (Italy), Lexis Nexis and Legifrance (France), the portals Rechtspreaak and
Raadvanstate (Netherlands), Courts and Tribunals Judiciary (UK), Bundesministerium
der Justiz und fur Verbraucherschutz (Germany) and ECJ.eu (European Court of
Justice) as well as the Network of the Presidents of the Supreme Judicial Courts of the
European Union did not provide any significant result.
61 “While countless undisputed transactions utilizing smart contracts are likely to move
forward on the basis of such automatic, electronic enforcement, there will likely
always be the need for human intervention to settle legal disputes.” Reggie O'Shields,
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Traditional jurisdictional means have limited applicability in the
context of Blockchain technology.62 The concept of location or presence
in jurisdictional means does not apply to the blockchain. A location for
the blockchain does not exist - not physically or even electronically.
Nodes that contain the blockchain and all of its information are located
all over the world. Transactions in the blockchain are fully networked
and “present” only in cyberspace. The nodes hold imperfect partial
copies of the blockchain; no particular node holds the entire blockchain.
More specifically, jurisdiction over the public blockchain does not exist
within the present doctrinal infrastructure for jurisdiction. In practice,
the blockchain itself cannot be regulated or governed because it is
decentralized and autonomous. No traditional jurisdictional principles
can apply because the blockchain is a mere collection of agreed upon
calculations by decentralized computer systems. The blockchain is
merely an idea reached by the consensus of computation; it is pure
information, contained only in the mathematical rules of its inception
and the sum of the computation. The blockchain is entirely maintained
and owned by a distributed group of anonymous users located
throughout the planet who would not likely recognize or comply with
any legal authority.
The unpredictability of the risks and the opportunities as well as
the concrete outcomes of blockchain in reshaping financial markets are
clear obstacles for regulators’ attempts at drafting new specific
regulation. Although financial innovation and technological innovation
have constantly developed, and their outcomes have always been
uncertain, this transitional era, characterized by the spread of a new
foundational technology, is particularly uncertain. This uncertainty
frustrates blockchain innovation instead of providing a secured
framework where revolutionary blockchain applications can flourish.
1. European Union
EU legislation in the context of DLT and blockchain technology
is slowly evolving. Although the European Union launched the program
“Digital Agenda for Europe” in 2010 and emphasized the relevance of
investment in digital economy as a key issue for economic growth and
prosperity,63 the program did not mention either the blockchain or the
DLT technology and did not refer to any concrete regulatory action to
Smart Contracts: Legal Agreements for the Blockchain, NORTH CAROLINA BANKING
INSTITUTE (March 2017).
62 For a full analysis of jurisdictional shortcomings in the context of blockchain
technology see Wulf A. Kaal & Craig Calcaterra, Open Source Blockchain Platform
Ecosystem of Dispute Resolution for Crypto Transactions (on file with author).
63 See European Commission, Press Release - Digital Agenda: investment in digital
economy holds key to Europe's future prosperity, says Commission report (May 17,
2010), available at http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-10-571_en.htm?locale=en
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
be considered in this regard.64 Similarly, the European Commission in
its communication to the European Parliament (“A Digital Single
Market Strategy for Europe”) in 2015 did not provide any reference to
blockchain.65 Finally, in June 2016, the European Securities and
Markets Authority (“ESMA”), Europe’s top financial watchdog,66
launched a debate on the regulation of blockchain.67 Because of the on-
going evolution of technological innovation and blockchain’s still rather
limited practical applications, ESMA considered a regulatory response
to the evolving technology premature.68
No concrete outcomes exists in terms of regulatory initiatives,
among the different Member States. In the last three years, the European
Banking Authority (EBA) has issued two general informative reports, a
first one in 201569 and a second one in 2016,70 while constantly
monitoring the development of blockchain within the markets,71 with an
eye on banking issues, including payment services, currencies, asset
registry, consistently with its institutional mission within the European
Union. At the moment, only the French government has taken steps to
implement blockchain to enhance efficiency in specific contexts,72
64 See European Commission, Digital Agenda for Europe (2015), available at
65 See European Commission, A Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe (May 6,
2015), available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?qid=1447773803386&uri=CELEX%3A52015DC0192.
66 Yolanda Bobeldijk, Esma: It’s ‘too early’ to regulate blockchain, Financial News
London(Feb. 7, 2017, 12:48 PM), available at
https://www.fnlondon.com/articles/european-watchdog-its-too-early-to-regulate-
blockchain-20170207.
67 See ESMA, supra note 22.
68 Id.
69 EBA, Cryptotechnologies, a major IT innovation and catalyst for change: 4
categories, 4 applications and 4 scenarios An exploration for transaction banking and
payments professionals (May 11, 2015), available at https://www.abe-
eba.eu/downloads/knowledge-and-
research/EBA_20150511_EBA_Cryptotechnologies_a_major_IT_innovation_v1_0.p
df
70 EBA, Applying cryptotechnologies to Trade Finance (May 2016), available at
https://www.abe-eba.eu/downloads/knowledge-and-
research/EBA_May2016_eAPWG_Applying_cryptotechnologies_to_Trade_Finance
.pdf.
71 See EBA, EBA Consumer Trend Report 2017 (Jun. 28, 2017), available at
http://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1720738/Consumer+Trends+Report+20
17.pdf: “One other trend identified is innovation in the payment infrastructure,
primarily through the use of blockchain technology, which allows the settlement of
payment transactions without the use of payment systems or correspondent banking
[…]In this area, the EBA continues to monitor innovations such as blockchain
technology and their impact on the products and services within the EBA’s scope of
action, but it is currently prioritising the implementation of the six technical standards
and five sets of guidelines that it has a mandate to develop under PSD2” (p. 26).
72 Passing the Ordonnance n° 2016-520 du 28 avril 2016 relative aux bons de caisse
, amending the French Financial and Monetary Code, Article L. 223-12 «Sans
préjudice des dispositions de l'article L. 223-4, l'émission et la cession de minibons
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
applying the blockchain to “certificates of deposits,” and the Law
“Sapin II,”73 authorizing the government to amend the securities law in
a view of applying the blockchain to specific categories of securities.74
The immutability and eternal recording of blockchain
technology may be the root of legal difficulties in European countries
that recognize the “right to be forgotten” or certain other privacy rights.
The right to be forgotten pertains to individuals’ rights to have certain
data deleted to avoid third party tracing.75 The European Union has
considered widespread recognition of the right to be forgotten, and
proposed revisions to the Data Protection Directive 95/4676, that has
represented, together with the Directive on Privacy and Electronic
Communications 2002/5877, the main instrument of data protection law
in the European Union, to include such rights.78 The approval of the
peuvent également être inscrites dans un dispositif d'enregistrement électronique
partagé permettant l'authentification de ces opérations, dans des conditions,
notamment de sécurité, définies par décret en Conseil d'Etat.»
73 LOI n° 2016-1691 du 9 décembre 2016 relative à la transparence, à la lutte contre
la corruption et à la modernisation de la vie économique, available at
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/eli/loi/2016/12/9/ECFM1605542L/jo#JORFARTI000
033558708 (last visited Jul. 12, 2017).
74 Id. Art. 120. “Dans les conditions prévues à l'article 38 de la Constitution, le
Gouvernement est autorisé à prendre par voie d'ordonnance, dans un délai de douze
mois à compter de la date de promulgation de la résente loi, les mesures relevant du
domaine de la loi nécessaires pour :
1° Adapter le droit applicable aux titres financiers et aux valeurs mobilières afin de
permettre la représentation et la transmission, au moyen d'un dispositif
d'enregistrement électronique partagé, des titres financiers qui ne sont pas admis aux
opérations d'un dépositaire central ni livrés dans un système de règlement et de
livraison d'instruments financiers;
2° Aménager et modifier toutes dispositions de nature législative favorisant la mise en
œuvre et tirant les conséquences des modifications apportées en application du 1°.
Un projet de loi de ratification est déposé devant le Parlement dans un délai de six
mois à compter de la publication de l'ordonnance”.
75 Rolf H. Weber, The Right to Be Forgotten: More Than a Pandora’s Box?, 2
JIPITEC 120, 121 (2011), available at https://www.jipitec.eu/issues/jipitec-2-2-
2011/3084/jipitec%202%20-%20a%20-%20weber.pdf.
76 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October
1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data
and on the free movement of such data (Data Protection Directive), available at
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:31995L0046.
77 Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 July
2002 concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the
electronic communications sector (Directive on privacy and electronic
communications), available at http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:32002L0058:en:HTML.
78 W. Scott Blackmer, GDPR: Getting Ready for the New EU General Data Protection
Regulation, INFOLAWGROUP (May 15, 2016), available at
http://www.infolawgroup.com/2016/05/articles/gdpr/gdpr-getting-ready-for-the-new-
eu-general-data-protection-regulation/; Peter Hustinx, EU Data Protection Law: The
Review of Directive 95/46/EC and the Proposed General Data Protection Regulation,
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Regulation 679/2016 (the General Data Protection Regulation)79 has
stressed the relevance of the “right to be forgotten”, providing that under
specific circumstances “The data subject shall have the right to obtain
from the controller the erasure of personal data concerning him or her
without undue delay and the controller shall have the obligation to
erase personal data without undue delay”.80 While the proposal has yet
to be adopted, other countries have followed the lead, specifically in
Latin American and Asia.81 Currently, countries that recognize or are
considering recognizing the right to be forgotten apply the concept
almost exclusively in the context of internet search engines.82 However,
the right to be forgotten is still in its infancy and its logic could apply to
other technologies, such as blockchain.83
2. United States
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has started to
evaluate the application of blockchain technology in the financial
services industry. In November of 2015, Commissioner Stein
commented on blockchain’s potential for tracing securities lending,
repo, and margin financing and monitoring systemic risk.84
Commissioner Stein cautioned, however, that as blockchain becomes
more fluent in the market “regulators need to be in a position to lead,
STATEWATCH (2014), available at http://www.statewatch.org/news/2014/sep/eu-
2014-09-edps-data-protection-article.pdf.
79 REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
THE COUNCIL of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation), available at
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/reform/files/regulation_oj_en.pdf.
80 Id., art. 17(1). Art. 17(2) further provides that: “Where the controller has made the
personal data public and is obliged pursuant to paragraph 1 to erase the personal
data, the controller, taking account of available technology and the cost of
implementation, shall take reasonable steps, including technical measures, to inform
controllers which are processing the personal data that the data subject has requested
the erasure by such controllers of any links to, or copy or replication of, those personal
data”.
81 Farhad Manjoo, ‘Right to Be Forgotten’ Online Could Spread, N.Y. TIMES (Aug. 5,
2015), https://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/06/technology/personaltech/right-to-be-
forgotten-online-is-poised-to-spread.html?_r=0.
82 Id.
83 “[S]ince the essence of blockchain technology is to allow for quicker, more efficient
and more reliable data exchanges, the blockchain could revolutionize any industry that
relies on data.” Stuart D. Levi, Blockchains Offer Revolutionary Potential in Fintech
and Beyond, PRACTITIONER INSIGHTS COMMENTARIES (March 13, 2017).
84 Financial Stability Oversight Council, FSOC 2016 Annual Report, (2016), 127,
available at https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/studies-
reports/Documents/FSOC%202016%20Annual%20Report.pdf.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
harnessing its benefits and responding quickly to potential
weaknesses.”85
Despite this early cautioning and call for action, the SEC has not
yet addressed core issues pertaining to the recognition of blockchain
technology applications in finance. Guidance is especially needed
regarding the recognition and application of crypto-currencies, tokens
as securities, and decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs) as
investment advisers, among many other issues pertaining to blockchain
applications or derivatives that are applied in finance.
SEC recognition of the most basic crypto-currency features is
uncertain. In early 2016, in a significant setback for crypto-currencies
and the crypto-currency industry, the SEC rejected the Winklevoss
twins’ application to establish an exchange traded fund (ETF) that was
intended to invest in Bitcoin exclusively.86 To allow individuals to
invest in Bitcoin without creating a Bitcoin wallet, the proposed ETF
had been intended to serve as a dollar-denominated proxy pegged to the
price of Bitcoin.87 In rejecting the application, the SEC reasoned that,
because of the unregulated nature of Bitcoin, the proposed fund was
susceptible to fraud.88 The SEC’s decision regarding the Bitcoin ETF
85 U.S. Securities and Exchanges Commission, Remarks of SEC Commissioner Kara
Stein, Surfing the Wave: Technology, Innovation, and Competition, Harvard Law
School’s Fidelity Guest Lecture Series (November 9, 2015), available at
https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/stein-2015-remarks-harvard-law-school.html.
86 Russell Brandom, The SEC just handed Bitcoin a huge setback
THE VERGE (Mar. 10, 2017, 4:10 PM), available at
http://www.theverge.com/2017/3/10/14883350/sec-bitcoin-etf-order-winklevoss-
denied .
87 See id.
88 Id. The SEC disapproved the proposed rule change that would have allowed the
listing of the shares of the Winklewoss Bitcoin Trust. See SEC, Release No. 34-80206
(March 10, 2017), available at https://www.sec.gov/rules/sro/batsbzx/2017/34-
80206.pdf. Pursuant to Section 19(b)(2)(C) of the Exchange Act, the SEC must
approve the proposed rule change of a self-regulatory organization (“SRO”) if the it
finds that the proposed rule change is consistent with the requirements of the Exchange
Act (p. 18). The SEC clarified that the Winklewoss proposal was similar to other past
proposals “to list and trade shares of exchange-traded products (ETPs) holding
precious metals assts that individuals could otherwise obtain directly (for example, in
the form of bullion coins), but at the cost of having to secure those holdings” (p. 20).
Therefore in reviewing the Winklewoss’ proposal the SEC used the standards applied
to previous commodity-trust ETPs. To come to the decision to disapprove the
proposed rule change, a topical issue is “the susceptibility of the shares or the
underlying asset to manipulation”, emphasizing the relevance of Section 6(b)(5) of the
Exchange Act. This rules requires “that the rules of a national securities exchange be
designed to prevent fraudulent and manipulative acts and practices and to protect
investors and the public interest” (p. 2). The Commission believes that, in order to
meet this standard, an exchange that lists and trades shares of commodity-trust
exchange-traded products (“ETPs”) must, in addition to other applicable requirements,
satisfy two requirements that are dispositive in this matter. First, the exchange must
have surveillance-sharing agreements with significant markets for trading the
underlying commodity or derivatives on that commodity. And second, those markets
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
reflects its distrust towards the crypto asset class as a whole, especially
funds attempting to trade digital currencies.
The U.S. Commodity Futures and Trade Commission (CFTC),
compared the blockchain technology to the internet revolution and
supported a “do no harm” approach in regulating blockchain
technology. The CFTC opined that this approach, promoted at the time
of the internet transformation by the American administration, was
successful and should be re-applied to blockchain.89
The Coinflip case seems to suggest that the CFTC intends to
regulate Bitcoin as a commodity.90 In 2015, the CFTC brought an action
against Coinflip, Inc. for operating a facility for trading commodities
futures without being registered under the Commodities Exchange Act
(CEA).91 In this case, Coinflip, Inc. operated a website that connected
buyers and sellers of standardized Bitcoin options and futures
contracts.92 The CFTC opined that “Bitcoin and other virtual currencies
are encompassed in the definition and properly defined as
commodities,”93 and are thus subject to the CEA. The CEA defines the
term “commodity” rather broadly to include “all services, rights, and
interests in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the
future dealt in.”94 Nevertheless, Coinflip agreed to settle the
administrative action with the CFTC without admitting or denying this
finding.
The IRS treats virtual currency, such as Bitcoin, as property. The
IRS has opined generally that: “the sale or exchange of convertible
virtual currency, or the use of convertible currency to pay for goods or
services in a real-world economy transaction, has tax consequences that
may result in a tax liability.”95 In 2014, the IRS issued a notice in
must be regulated” (p. 2). The SEC also noted that “the significant markets for Bitcoins
are unregulated. Therefore, as the Exchange has not entered into, and would currently
be unable to enter into, the type of surveillance-sharing agreement that has been in
place with respect to all previously approved commodity-trust ETPs—agreements that
help address concerns about the potential for fraudulent or manipulative acts and
practices in this market—the Commission does not find the proposed rule change to
be consistent with the Exchange Act” (p. 2).
89 See CFTC, Special Address of CFTC Commissioner J. Christopher Giancarlo
Before the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation 2016 Blockchain Symposium
(March 29, 2016), available at
http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/SpeechesTestimony/opagiancarlo-13.
90 In the Matter of: Coinflip, Inc., d/b/a Derivabit, and Francisco Riordan,
Respondents, 2015 WL 5535736, *2 (Sept. 17, 2015).
91 Id. at *1.
92 Id.
93 Id. at *2.
94 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9) (2012).
95 IRS Notice 2014-21: Virtual Currency Notice at 1 (March 25, 2014), available at
https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-14-21.pdf.
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
response to numerous questions on the tax status of digital currencies.96
While the IRS acknowledged digital currencies have many of the
characteristics of other currencies, the IRS stipulated that “it does not
have legal tender status in any jurisdiction.”97 Accordingly, the IRS
declared that crypto currencies should be taxed as property for U.S.
federal tax purposes, because “General tax principles applicable to
property transactions apply to transactions using virtual currency.”98
However, the IRS was very specific about limiting its current position
to transactions involving “convertible virtual currency,” leaving the tax
treatment of crypto-limited partnership interests unaddressed.
While the value of Bitcoin in 2013 under $20 and its value
appreciated to over $1200 in 2017, in the past four years, the IRS has
only received around 900 Form 8949 that would indicate some gain or
loss from cryptocurrencies.99 The IRS treats cryptocurrencies the same
as any other security. However, the tech industry has not been claiming
income from cryptocurrency in the same way other securities are being
accounted for – requiring an 8949 to be filed when considering capital
gains or losses.100 As a result, the IRS has started investigating the under
reporting of cryptocurrencies.
The States of Arizona, Nevada, Vermont and Delaware have
launched their specific regulatory initiatives. The State of Arizona,
passing the so-called “Blockchain Bill”101 into law, provided specific
regulation for electronic signature, blockchain and smart contracts. The
law now expressly defines blockchain102 and smart contracts.103 It also
recognizes “a signature … secured through blockchain technology” as
equivalent to an electronic signature in an electronic form and “a record
or contract secured through blockchain” as equivalent to an electronic
96 IRS Virtual Currency Guidance: Virtual Currency Is Treated as Property for U.S.
Federal Tax Purposes; General Rules for Property Transactions Apply, INTERNAL
REVENUE SERVICE (Mar. 25, 2014), https://www.irs.gov/uac/newsroom/irs-virtual-
currency-guidance (page last reviewed or updated Sept. 14, 2016).
97 Id.
98 Id.
99 Id.
100 Ed Zwirn, No, you can’t avoid taxes by investing in Bitcoin, New York Post (Apr.
8, 2017), available at http://nypost.com/2017/04/08/no-you-cant-avoid-taxes-by-
investing-in-bitcoin/.
101 “Signatures; electronic transactions; Blockchain technology”, Amending Section
44-7003, Arizona Revised Statutes; Amending Title 44, Chapter 26, Arizona Revised
Statutes, By Adding Article 5; Relating To Electronic Transactions.
102 Id. “"blockchain technology" means distributed ledger technology that uses a
distributed, decentralized, shared and replicated ledger, which may be public or
private, permissioned or permissionless, or driven by tokenized crypto economics or
tokenless. The data on the ledger is protected with cryptography, is immutable and
auditable and provides an uncensored truth”.
103 Id. “"Smart Contract" Means An Event-Driven Program, With State, That Runs On
A Distributed, Decentralized, Shared And Replicated Ledger And That Can Take
Custody Over And Instruct Transfer Of Assets On That Ledger”.
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
record in an electronic form, as well as the existence of smart
contracts.104
Consistently with Arizona, the State of Nevada passed the Bill
398, providing a definition of blockchain105 and included blockchain
within the definition of electronic record for similar purposes.106
Furthermore, the Bill prescribes that local governments shall not “(a)
Impose any tax or fee on the use of a blockchain by any person or entity;
(b) Require any person or entity to obtain from the board of county
commissioners any certificate, license or permit to use a blockchain; or
(c) Impose any other requirement relating to the use of a blockchain by
any person or entity.”107
The State of Vermont adopted a more prudent approach. The
report “Blockchain Technology: Opportunities and Risk”108 considered
that “at present, the costs and challenges associated with the use of
blockchain technology for Vermont’s public recordkeeping outweigh
the identifiable benefits”.109 The report also emphasized the relevance
of recognizing blockchain technology, that would determine “a “first
mover” advantage with the potential to bring economic activity
surrounding the development of blockchain technology to Vermont”,
remarking however the uncertainty around such potential, “difficult to
quantify and challenging to capture due to the nature of the
technology”.110 For the moment, Vermont has recognized the possibility
to use blockchain in the context of a trial, under specific conditions.111
Delaware launched the Delaware Blockchain Initiative in 2016, to
maintain its leading role in the context of corporate governance.112
104 Id. “a contract relating to a transaction may not be denied legal effect, validity or
enforceability solely because that contract contains a smart contract term”
105 See State of Nevada, Senate Bill 398 (Jun. 5, 2017), Section 1, available at
https://legiscan.com/NV/text/SB398/id/1626453: ““Blockchain” means an electronic
record of transactions or other data which is: 1. Uniformly ordered; 2. Redundantly
maintained or processed by one or more computers or machines to guarantee the
consistency or nonrepudiation of the recorded transactions or other data; and 3.
Validated by the use of cryptography”.
106 Id. Section 3: ““Electronic record” means a record created, generated, sent,
communicated, received or stored by electronic means. The term includes, without
limitation, a blockchain.”
107 Id. Sections 4 and 6.
108 State of Vermont, “Blockchain Technology: Opportunities and Risk”, 15 January
2016, available at http://legislature.vermont.gov/assets/Legislative-
Reports/blockchain-technology-report-final.pdf.
109 Id.
110 Id.
111 See 12 V.S.A. § 1913. The Statute defines “blockchain technology” as “a
mathematically secured, chronological, and decentralized consensus ledger or
database, whether maintained via Internet interaction, peer-to-peer network, or
otherwise”.
112 See A. Tinianow, Delaware Blockchain Initiative: Transforming the Foundational
Infrastructure of Corporate Finance, Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate
Governance and Financial Regulation (March 16), 2017, available at
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
The State of Illinois launched the Illinois Blockchain Initiative
in November 2016, with the purpose “to determine if this
groundbreaking technology can be leveraged to create more efficient,
integrated and trusted state services, while providing a welcoming
environment for the Blockchain community.”113 In addition, the State
of Illinois has implemented a web-based eProcurement system
(BidBuy) as part of the Illinois Blockchain Initiative: state agencies will
use BidBuy for the advertisement of solicitation opportunities,
evaluation of bids, and publication of contract awards, making it the
State's primary solution for sourcing and placing orders from vendors
for the Chief Procurement Office - General Services.114 Furthermore,
the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation has
been the first regulator in the world to join a blockchain consortium, the
R3 consortium:115 led by the New York based start-up R3 CEV, the R3
consortium is supported by heterogeneous institutions, including banks,
financial firms, professional associations, professional services firms as
well as technology companies, for the purpose of developing a specific
blockchain technology for financial services (Corda).116
Self-regulatory organizations have also opined on the regulatory
environment for blockchain technology. The US Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority (FINRA) has issued a report,117 establishing a
common basis for a dialogue with market participants, raising a
multitude of questions, without providing specific answers. Similarly,
at the international level, IOSCO’s initial study of blockchain
culminated with the publication of the Research Report on Financial
Technologies (Fintech)118 provided a preliminary assessment focusing
on risks and benefits as well as opportunities. At this stage, an
evaluation of the position of global institutions is premature.
https://corpgov.law.harvard.edu/2017/03/16/delaware-blockchain-initiative-
transforming-the-foundational-infrastructure-of-corporate-finance/.
113 See Illinois Department of Innovation, Blockchain in Illinois, available at
https://www2.illinois.gov/sites/doit/Pages/BlockChainInitiative.aspx.
114 See Chief Procurement Office, The new State of Illinois eProcurement System -
BidBuy Deployment, available at
http://www.purchase.state.il.us/ipb/IPBhomep.nsf?Open.
115 R3, https://www.r3.com/. See also Business Insider, One US regulator has joined
the R3 blockchain consortium (Mar. 20, 2017, 12:11 PM), available at
http://www.businessinsider.com/one-us-regulator-has-joined-the-r3-blockchain-
consortium-2017-3?international=true&r=US&IR=T. See also Anna Irrera, Illinois
watchdog first U.S. regulator to join blockchain consortium R3, Reuters (Mar. 16,
2017), available at http://www.reuters.com/article/us-blockchain-illinois-
idUSKBN16N2FN.
116 Id.
117 See FINRA, supra note 19..
118 IOSCO, supra note 17, 51.
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
IV. Private Investment Funds’ Use of Blockchain Technology
Private investment funds have played a leading role in banking
disintermediation in the past.119 Banking disintermediation emerged in
the 70s120 when corporations started obtaining funding from sources
other than banks, including from non-bank lenders or by issuing
bonds.121 Private investment funds’ involvement in banking functions
accelerated in the aftermath of the financial crisis of 2008. After the
crisis, newly issued regulation restrained banks from lending, in
particular to SMEs. This opened up a new market for private investment
funds that stepped into the void left by the new regulatory regime.122
Similar to the market structure changes triggered by private
investment funds in the late 2000s, private investment funds
implementing blockchain technology are facilitating and spearheading
radical changes in financial markets. First and foremost, the structural
characteristic of blockchain as a decentralized model for financial
transactions disintermediates and disrupts the existing financial
infrastructure. Private investment funds that are first movers in the
implementation of the blockchain infrastructure systems in finance
directly contribute to that disintermediation and facilitate the
accelerating evolution of the blockchain infrastructure in finance.
This paper analyzes the different emphasis in blockchain
applications employed by European and American private investment
funds. While smaller private fund advisers currently appear to be the
primary beneficiaries of blockchain technology in both Europe and the
United States, larger private fund investors also have started consider
blockchain optimization for their operations and investments. Because
larger private fund advisers are restricted by legacy systems and
infrastructure their involvement in blockchain technology is still
limited. However, the involvement of larger private investment fund
advisers with blockchain technology may change in the foreseeable
future if and when larger managers realize that their smaller competitors
119 See Steven L. Schwarcz, Framing Address: A framework for analyzing Financial
Market Transformation, 36 Seattle U. L. Rev. (2012-2013). See also Marcel Kahn &
Edward Rock, Hedge Fund Activism in the Enforcement of Bondholder Rights, 103
Nw. U. L. Rev (2009).
120 See Charles K. Whitehead, The Evolution of Debt Covenants, the Credit Market,
and Corporate Governance, J. Corp. L. 654 2008-2009.
121 See Marco Dell’Erba, The introduction of credit funds through ELTIF The case of
France and Italy, Rev. Trim. de Dr. Fin., n. 2-2016, 3.
122 See Steven L. Schwarcz, Regulating Shadows: Financial Regulation and
Responsibility Failure, 70 Wash. and Lee L. Rev. (2013). 1781-1828; Shadow
Banking, Financial Markets, and the Real Estate Sector, 32 Rev. Banking & Fin. L.
(2012-2013); Framing Address: A Framework for Analyzing Financial Market
Transformation, 36 Seattle U. L. Rev. (2012-2013); Iris H-Y Chiu, Transcending
Regulatory Fragmentation and the Construction of an Economy-Society Discourse:
Implications for Regulatory Policy Derived from a Functional Approach to
Understanding Shadow Banking, 42 J. Corp. L. (2016-2017), 327-358.
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
who utilize these technologies gain substantial operational efficiencies
and cost savings and are able to substantially diversify their portfolio
holdings via such technologies. The threshold for change for bigger
managers may be dictated by the implementation cost of such new
technologies. If and when the long-term benefits of using the
technologies exceed the implementation cost, which are much larger for
larger managers than for the smaller managers who are currently
experimenting with such technologies, larger managers are incentivized
to start the innovation process as well.
1. United States
Several private investment funds have spearheaded the
implementation of blockchain technology and smart contracting in their
business model. While some funds simply focus on trading bitcoin and
other cryptocurrencies to avoid market fluctuations, others invest in
and/or acquire companies that use blockchain technology to provide
synergies to their other portfolio companies. Yet others go much further
by fully automating a hedge fund secured by blockchain technology,
using blockchain technology to improve administrative procedures of
private equity deal making, or using cryptocurrencies as incentives for
data scientists’ competitive models that facilitate investment analysis
efficiencies. Examples include private investment funds such as
Polychain Capital,123 the Northern Trust124 in cooperation with IBM,
Numerai,125 LendingRobot,126 and Intellisys Capital LLC,127
Melonport,128 among many others.
Several private investment funds have spearheaded and continue
to expand the implementation of blockchain technology and smart
contracting in their business models. In February 2017, Northern Trust
and IBM entered into a partnership for the commercial use of blockchain
in the private fund industry. The partnership provides an enhanced and
efficient approach to private equity administration.129 The
implementation of the Northern Trust and IBM blockchain is intended
to increase the efficiency, transparency, and speed of private equity
transactions, improve security, and bring innovation to the private
equity market by simplifying the complex and labor-intensive
123 Polychain Capital, https://angel.co/polychain-capital (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
124 Northern Trust, https://www.northerntrust.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
125 Numerai, https://numer.ai/ (last visited Apr. 17, 2017).
126 LendingRobot, https://www.lendingrobot.com/#/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
127 Intellisys Capital LLC, http://www.intellisys.ai/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
128 Melonport, https://melonport.com/, (last visited Jul. 11,, 2017).
129 See Northern Trust, Press Release- IBM, Northern Trust and IBM Pioneer Use of
Blockchain Technology to Help Transform Private Equity Administration (Feb. 21,
2017), available at https://www.northerntrust.com/about-us/news/press-
release?c=70b5ba1adc9928f9977162844c34f57a
http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/51655.wss.
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
transactions in the private equity market. While the current legal and
administrative processes that support private equity are time consuming,
expensive, lack transparency, and involve lengthy, duplicative, and
fragmented investment and administrative processes, the partnership’s
solution delivers an enhanced and efficient approach to private equity
administration.130 More specifically, unlike the current deal practice in
private equity, which requires parties to reconcile multiples copies of
the documents that form the deals to understand the greater picture, the
blockchain program announced by Northern Trust and IBM allows all
involved parties in an equity deal to look at a single compiled version
of the transaction and all other data relating to the deal.131
Another example of the use of blockchain technology for private
investment funds is Numerai. Numerai is a private investment fund with
a global equity strategy that will go live on the blockchain later this
year.132 Numerai operates on the Ethereum blockchain, utilizing a
cryptocurrency called “Numeraire.” Numerai uses artificial intelligence
to convert financial data into machine learning problems for data
scientists. On February 21, 2017, Numerai, announced: “[Today]
12,000 data scientists were issued 1 million crypto-tokens to incentivize
the construction of an artificial intelligence hedge fund.”133 Using data
scientists for investment analysis creates efficiency through a synthesis
of data. Data scientists working in this model work to solve the same
problems in their own unique way with different strategies. Numerai
synthesizes these models to create a meta-model out of all the
predictions from the data scientists.134 In the Numerai model, the use of
artificial intelligence ultimately helps achieve the goal of efficiency and
optimum capital allocation by reducing overhead costs because there is
no cost of human capital.135 In addition, Numerai eliminates barriers to
entry because users do not need capital or any special finance or data
knowledge.
LendingRobot’s LendingRobot Series is a fully automated
hedge fund secured by blockchain technology.136 Unlike other
130 See Id.
131 See Id.
132 See Laura Shin, This Is the World’s First Cryptocurrency Issued by a Hedge Fund,
FORBES (Feb. 21, 2017, 7:00 AM), available at
https://www.forbes.com/sites/laurashin/2017/02/21/this-is-the-worlds-
firstcryptocurrency-issued-by-a-hedge-fund/#61dcf68560b6.
133 A New Cryptocurrency for Coordinating Artificial Intelligence on Numerai,
MEDIUM (Feb. 21, 2017), available at https://medium.com/numerai/a-new-
cryptocurrency-forcoordinating-artificial-intelligence-on-numerai-9251a131419a.
134 See Shin, supra note 67.
135 See Interview with Richard Craib, Founder, Numerai, Crowdsourcing a Machine
Learning Hedge Fund, TECHEMERGENCE (Nov. 10, 2016), available at
https://www.techemergence.com/crowdsourcing-a-machine-learning-hedge-fund/.
136 Press Release, deBanked, Introducing LendingRobot Series: One-Stop Investing in
Alternative Lending (Jan. 26, 2017), available at
http://debanked.com/2017/01/introducinglendingrobot-series-one-stop-investing-in-
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
blockchain based hedge funds that invest specifically in cryptocurrency,
such as Global Advisers and Polychain Capital, the LendingRobot
Series invests in lending marketplaces— Lending Club, Prosper,
Funding Circle, and Lending Home.137 Its trading is determined by an
algorithm based on the investor’s risk preferences. Once the investor
has created a trading profile, LendingRobot selects and executes trades
that are recorded in the blockchain public ledger on a weekly basis.
Unlike traditional hedge funds that are rather secretive, the
LendingRobot ledger shows detailed holdings and provides a “hash
code” signature as evidence that the data is tamper-proof in the
blockchain.138 Established private investment fund managers may
consider implementing blockchain technologies in the foreseeable
future. Most large fund advisers in the private equity and hedge fund
industry have not yet considered implementing blockchain technology
in combination with big data applications and artificial intelligence.
This, however, may change in the foreseeable future if and when larger
managers realize that their smaller competitors who utilize these
technologies gain substantial operational efficiencies and cost savings
and are able to substantially diversify their portfolio holdings via such
technologies. The threshold for change for bigger managers may be
dictated by the implementation cost of such new technologies. If and
when the long-term benefits of using the technologies exceed the
implementation cost, which are much larger for larger managers than
for the smaller managers who are currently experimenting with such
technologies, larger managers are incentivized to start the innovation
process as well.
2. Europe
In Europe, venture capital funds are the most engaged asset class
in blockchain technology. European venture capital funds are engaged
in building new blockchain applications and platforms. A group of the
UK’s biggest asset management companies (Schroders Investment
Management, Aberdeen Asset Management, Columbia Threadneedle
Investments, Aviva Investors and Henderson Global Investors)
partnered to invest in a secret project on blockchain, in particular to test
if blockchain can be used to cut trading costs, by removing
intermediaries and reducing manual processing of trades, and
alternative-lending/; Dan Cummings, LendingRobot Introduces Robo-Fund
LendingRobot Series, ETHNEWS (Jan. 30, 2017), available at
https://www.ethnews.com/lendingrobot-introduces-robo-fund-
lendingrobot-series .
137 Press Release, deBanked, supra note 61; Cummings, supra note 61.
138 Press Release, deBanked, supra note 61; Cummings, supra note 61.
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
intervening in the direct trading of illiquid securities.139 Moreover,
Neufund140 (participated by the Atlantic Fund), is building a blockchain-
based and investor-directed platform, whose main purpose is to bridge
the world of blockchain and venture by enabling the creation of a new
kind of VC fund. The fund attempts to unlock the resources of
cryptoccurency and blockchain to fund startups and any form of
technological innovation and disruption.141
Similarly, Bigchain DB,142 financed by Anthemis143 (London)
and Early Bird144 (Berlin), attempts to support developers and
enterprises to deploy blockchain proof-of-concepts, platforms, and
applications with a scalable blockchain database.145 Bitbond146
(financed by Point Nine)147 is a global marketplace lending platform for
small business loans who attempts to make investing and financing
globally accessible.148 Point Nine has also invested in Chainalysis,149 to
manage the security of digital assets. Coinsilium,150 venture capitalist
based London, invests in the development of blockchain companies
through a consortium of investors. Among others, Coinsilium has
invested in SatoshiPay,151 a company that “is developing a two-way
payment platform, which enables online content providers to monetise
their digital content through the acceptance of nanopayments.”152
139 https://www.ft.com/content/3be95e82-cc19-11e5-a8ef-ea66e967dd44. See also
Daniel Palmer, Five UK Mutual Funds Partner on Blockchain Trading Project, 8 (Feb.
8, 2016, 2:40 AM), available at http://www.coindesk.com/five-uk-mutual-funds-
partner-blockchain/
140 Neufund, https://neufund.org/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
141 See Id.
142 Bigchain DB, https://www.bigchaindb.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017)
143 Anthemis, http://www.anthemis.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
144 Early Bird, https://www.earlybird.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
145 Crunchbase, profile of Bigchain DB, available
athttps://www.crunchbase.com/organization/bigchaindb#/entity (last visited Jul. 11,
2017): “BigchainDB supports a wide range of industries and use cases from identity
and intellectual property to supply chains, energy, IoT and financial ecosystems
without sacrificing scale, security or performance. With high throughput, sub-second
latency and powerful crypto-condition escrow functionality to automate release-of-
assets, BigchainDB looks, acts and feels like a database but has the core blockchain
characteristics that enterprises want”
146 Bitbond, https://www.bitbond.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017)
147 http://www.pointninecap.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017)
148 https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/bitbond#/entity (last visited Jul. 11,
2017)
149 Chainalysis, https://www.chainalysis.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
150 Coinsilium, https://www.coinsilium.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017). See also Peter
Campbell, Coinsilium becomes first blockchain company to float, Financial Times
(Dec. 14, 2015), available at https://www.ft.com/content/c76f781e-a27b-11e5-8d70-
42b68cfae6e4.
151 Satoshipay, https://satoshipay.io/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
152 Coinsilium, Investee Company Update, 17 May 2017, available at
https://www.coinsilium.com/regulatory-announcements/investee-company-update-
3/.
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
The venture capital firm Blockchain Capital153 is raising capital
through an Initial Coin Offering (ICO), a new form of crowdfunding
based on cryptocurrency tokens,154 selling its own Ethereum-based
smart contract digital token for its venture fund,155 where they represent
an indirect fractional non-voting economic interest in Blockchain
Capital III, Digital Liquid Venture Fund, LP.156 Started as a
phenomenon that is revolutionizing the way start-up companies
investing in blockchain raise capital (in the last 12 months ICOs have
raised $331 million, overtaking venture capitalists’ investments),157 it
may become an alternative method for many traditional companies.158
The implementation of blockchain technology often goes hand
in hand with the use of big data applications and artificial intelligence,
also by established larger managers. The abovementioned examples
refer all to the implementation of blockchain and smart contracts. A
similar trend is the one of investment fund managers implementing AI
and machine learning technologies. This is the case, among others, of
Aidyia,159 a Hong-Kong based hedge fund, trading in US equities,160 or
153 Blockchain Capital, http://blockchain.capital/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
154 Ben Dickson, Can you trust crypto-token crowdfunding?, (Feb. 12, 2017), available
at https://techcrunch.com/2017/02/12/can-you-trust-crypto-token-crowdfunding/. On
the different types of digital tokens, see Mona El Isa, The Difference Between Protocol
Tokens and Traditional Asset Tokens(May 16, 2017), available at
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/difference-between-protocol-tokens-traditional-
asset-mona-el-isa?trk=v-
feed&lipi=urn%3Ali%3Apage%3Ad_flagship3_feed%3BCaaKpuzaDcB010Q%2B4
fWtJw%3D%3D.
155 Cade Metz, The Initial Coin Offering, the Bitcoin-y Stock That’s Not Stock—But
Definitely a Big Deal, Wired (March 16, 2017, 7:00 AM), available at
https://www.wired.com/2017/03/initial-coin-offering-stock-thats-not-stock/.
156 See Richard Kastelein, Blockchain Capital Closes ICO – $10 Million in Six Hours
Raised in Record Time, Blockchain News, (Apr. 11, 2017), available at
http://www.the-blockchain.com/2017/04/11/blockchain-capital-closes-ico-10-
million-in-six-hours-raised-in-record-time/
157 See Nick Tomaino, Tokens, Tokens and More Tokens, 1 May 2017, available at
https://thecontrol.co/tokens-tokens-and-more-tokens-d4b177fbb443. See also Richard
Kastelein, ICO Token Raises Blow Past VC for Blockchain Investment in last 12
Months, 6 May 2017, available at http://www.the-blockchain.com/2017/05/06/ico-
token-raises-blow-past-vc-blockchain-investment-last-12-months/
158 See Alex Tapscott & Don Tapscott, How blockchain is Changing Finance, Harv.
Bus. Rev.. (Mar. 1, 2017), available at https://hbr.org/2017/03/how-blockchain-is-
changing-finance .
159 Aidyia, http://aidyia.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
160 Cade Metz, The Rise of the Artificially Intelligent Hedge Fund, Wired (Jan. 25,
2016, 7:00 AM), available at https://www.wired.com/2016/01/the-rise-of-the-
artificially-intelligent-hedge-fund/.
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Bridgewater,161 building an algorithmic model to automate the firm’s
management.162
V. Data
The dataset for this article comprises a sample of private
investment funds implementing blockchain technology in either their
strategy or operation (N=120). The authors hand-coded individual use
of blockchain technology for each fund in the dataset. We contacted the
private investment fund advisers in our sample via e-mail, phone-calls,
interviews, and their websites (see Figure 1). The 120 fund advisers in
our sample did not answer all questions and often we were unable to
obtain available information on all questions.
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Email Phone Website Contact Other
Figure 1: Contact method US vs. EU.
Figure 1 shows the contact method for the two datasets. Given
that email success rates were lower in the US, the phone contact follow
up is higher for US fund advisers who utilize blockchain technology.
161 Bridgewater Associates LLP, https://www.bridgewater.com/ (last visited Jul. 11,
2017)
162 Rob Copeland & Bradley Hope, The World’s Largest Hedge Fund Is Building an
Algorithmic Model From its Employees’ Brains, Wall Street Journal (Dec. 22, 2016,
1:14 PM), available at https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-worlds-largest-hedge-fund-
is-building-an-algorithmic-model-of-its-founders-brain-1482423694.
27
detcatnoC
sdnuF
fo
rebmuN
Contact Method
n=98
Method
US EU
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Hedge Fund Venture Capital Private Equity Tech. Other
U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Figure 2: Types of Funds in US vs. EU.
Figure 2 illustrates the different categories of private investment
funds that use blockchain technology in Europe and the US. In the US,
the majority of private funds are hedge funds (10), tech funds (7),
private equity (5), venture capitals (4) and others (2). In Europe, the
distribution among the types of investors is different: the majority of the
private funds identified are venture capitals (22), followed by hedge
funds (5) and private equity funds (3). Moreover, the vast majority of
European private funds invest in “Seed” and “Early stage Ventures,”
focusing on European companies.
Figure 3: Blockchain Engagement by Private Investment Funds by
Region compiling all 28(27) EU countries as a single representative not
as an EU block.
Figure 3 shows that United States is the only country in red,
suggesting the highest proportion of blockchain-based private
investment funds. Other countries, such as the United Kingdom are
visible in yellow and the rest of the countries in different shades of
28
sdnuF
fo
rebmuN
Type of Fund
n=105
Type of Fund
50
40
30
20
10
0
Hedge Fund Venture Capital Private Equity Tech. Other
sdnuF
fo
rebmuN
Type of Fund
n=105
Type of Fund
US EU
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
green. This would seem to indicate that the private investment funds in
the United States are investing more than private investment funds in
other countries in blockchain technology. However, when standardizing
the comparison units, in the entire United States, there are 43 private
investment funds that are utilizing blockchain in some capacity. This
outnumbers any individual country in Europe by almost double. If we
consider Europe as a whole, instead of each individual country, Europe
has a total of 70 funds utilizing blockchain technology (excluding
Russia which has 2). Although the United States as a country seems to
be investing in blockchain heavily, Europe and their financial
institutions are pursuing FinTech at the same or greater rate when
compared to the United States. The United States has a population of
roughly 321 million people and 43 funds. This averages about 7.5
million people per fund utilizing blockchain. By comparison, the UK
has 65 million people with 23 funds utilizing blockchain technology.
This averages roughly 2.8 million people per fund. Although the map
suggests that the United States is heavily invested in blockchain, in
comparison with other countries we see a more even distribution
between countries than the map would suggest.
The geographic distribution emerging from the data highlights
that three main European poles emerge: London, Paris163 and Berlin.
Regarding Luxembourg, traditionally a leading hub for private funds, it
has not been possible to identify any private fund investing in
blockchain. This is likely due to the unavailability of public information
connected to Luxembourgian funds investing in blockchain rather than
to a lack of Luxembourgian funds, in principle to be excluded. However,
Luxembourg, together with Switzerland, has been active in establishing
specific initiatives with the purpose of attracting new market players and
start-up investing in blockchain: in Luxembourg Schorechain,164
Fundchain,165 as well as Fundsquare166 of the Group Luxembourg Stock
Exchange together, and in Swiss CryptoValley Association.167
163 John Dizard, Paris turns to English law to lure City business, Financial Times (May
19, 2016), available at https://www.ft.com/content/113f6c78-3bdd-11e7-821a-
6027b8a20f23 .
164 Scorechain, https://www.scorechain.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
165 Fundchain, http://fundchain.lu/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017)
166 Fundsquare, https://www.fundsquare.net/homepage (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
167 CryptoValley Association, https://cryptovalley.swiss/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Figure 4: Private Investment Funds with Blockchain Applications – US
vs. EU compiling all 28(27) EU countries in the dataset as an EU block
Figure 4 shows the US vs. EU fund managers who utilize
blockchain technology by showing all 28(27) EU countries in the
dataset as an EU block. Naturally, showing all funds in European
countries as one country changes the proportions and the United States
does no longer look as strongly represented (in yellow). The biggest
takeaway, however, from comparing Figure 3 with Figure 4 is that
Russia, including Baltic states168 and former Russian countries, and
China retain their role (in green) consistently. In summary, the market
for private investment funds who invest in- and utilize blockchain
technology appears to be near equally divided between the US and the
EU with Russia and China playing a significant yet not as strong role.
168 Among Baltic states, Estonia is implementing radical transformations adopting the
blockchain technology not only for commercial activities (the project E-residency
allows foreign citizens to establish a business with Estonian jurisdiction) ) but also to
enhance the development of to the so-called “Govtech”, transferring to the blockchain
a broad range of activities connected to public services. These activities include
medical records, governmental records, notary services (the “Public notary” project
grants remote acces to notary services), banking infrastructure (implemented by LHV
Pank), and e-voting systems (led by the Estonian division of Nasdaq). See Guest
Author, How Estonia Brought Blockchain Closer to Citizens: GovTech Case Studies,
The Cointelegraph (Mar. 7, 2017), available at https://cointelegraph.com/news/how-
estonia-brought-blockchain-closer-to-citizens-govtech-case-studies.
See Alicia Naumoff, Power to the People: Blockchain Replaces Government in
Europe, The Cointelegraph (Jan. 27, 2017), available at
https://cointelegraph.com/news/power-to-the-people-blockchain-replaces-
government-in-europe.
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

20
15
10
5
0
1-50 51-100 101-150 151-200 201+
U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Figure 5: Assets Under Management US vs EU.
Figure 5 shows the size of private investment funds (data
available for 59 funds) in the US vs. the EU. While in the US, the
majority of the private funds have AUM varying in a range comprised
between $1 to #50 million AUM with only 2 funds whose AUM are
between $101-150 AUM and above to $ 200 million AUM, in Europe
the situation is rather different: private funds with an AUM higher than
$200 million are the majority and smaller funds are distributed in the
different clusters.
This could suggest that in Europe larger private investment fund
advisers are more willing to make the required investments into a
blockchain infrastructure whereas in the US the legacy systems utilized
by larger private investment fund advisers creates a barrier to entry for
larger private investment fund advisers to invest in and utilize
blockchain technology. Theoretically, however, legacy systems in the
EU should create the same barriers for larger private investment fund
advisers. There is no reason to believe that legacy systems in the United
States would constitute more of an obstacle than legacy systems in the
EU.
The differences in size between the American the European
market can partially be explained by the age, characteristics, and
investment purpose of American and European private investment fund
blockchain initiatives. American private investment funds investing in
blockchain are mostly newly and ad hoc created investment vehicles,
focused exclusively on blockchain. Whereas the vast majority of
European private funds are more established and older financial
institutions, that simply diversify their investments with investments in
blockchain and cryptocurrencies.
31
sdnuF
fo
rebmuN
AUM
n= 59
AUM IN $US
20
15
10
5
0
1-50 51-100 101-150 151-200 201+
sdnuF
fo
rebmuN
AUM
n= 59
AUM in $US
US EU
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
25
20
15
10
5
0
Crypto Smart K Assets Security Growth Innovation Fintech Decentralized
Currency
Figure 6: Cluster Categories of Blockchain Use in Private Investment
Funds US vs. EU.
Private investment funds describe their funds’ use of blockchain
technology with several key words in their marketing materials.
Clustering these words allowed the authors to identify the funds’
strategy and approach in their use of blockchain technology. The
authors identified nine key terms to see how these companies are
discussing their services. The purpose of the word cluster graph is to
show how often these United Stated and European funds are using
certain words on their websites when discussing the approach and
strategy of their respective fund. The categories in Figure 4 are the
popular terms used by private investment fund advisers that are
consistently associated with the Blockchain platform.
The terms therein are defined as follows: (1.) Crypto Currency:
Digital currency in which encryption techniques are used to regulate the
generation of units of currency and verify the transfer of funds,
operating independently of a central bank;169 (2.) Smart Contracts:
Smart contracts are computer protocols that facilitate, verify, or enforce
the negotiation or performance of a contract, or that make a contractual
clause unnecessary;170 (3.) Digital Assets: A financial instrument – such
169 Ex. “DC converts cash deposits into DC Assets, a form of digital currency that is
secured by the Ethereum network and collateralized by these customer deposits.” How
Does Decentralized Capital Work?, Decentralized Capital - Government Currencies
on the Ethereum Blockchain, available at
https://www.decentralizedcapital.com/#!/faq (last visited Jul. 11, 2017). Ex. “Our
unique model enables us to deploy our resources to build the crypto currencies and
blockchain ecosystem over the long term.” The nexus of blockchain technology and
finance., Digital Currency Group, http://dcg.co/(last visited May 28, 2017).
170 Ex. “Workflow Automation; Smart contracts ensure all relevant parties remain
synchronized, even on the most complex financial instruments” Workflow
Automation, Axoni, https://axoni.com/home (last visited Jul. 11, 2017). Ex. “Smart
contracts represent a next step in the progression of blockchains from a financial
32
sdnuF
fo
rebmuN
Cluster Graph
n=74
Terms
US EU
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
as a dollar, bond, or derivative that is cryptographically issued, held, and
transferred on a blockchain. This novel medium for assets, which is
similar to bearer instruments like cash, but digital, is better suited to the
security and innovation requirements of modern financial applications
than centralized ledgers that immobilize assets and depend on
messaging and reconciliation;171 (4.) Security: Process to create rules
and to take actions such as implementing systems and measures to
protect a fund and their clients against attacks over the Internet;172 (5.)
Growth: Attainable growth;173 (6.) Innovation: A new method, idea, or
product that a fund is using in the financial industry;174 (7.) FinTech:
transaction protocol to an all-purpose utility. They are pieces of software, not contracts
in the legal sense, that extend blockchains’ utility from simply keeping a record of
financial transaction entries to automatically implementing terms of multiparty
agreements.” Blockchain- the benefits of smart contracts, Deloitte United States,
available at https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en.html (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
171 Ex. “The value of DC Assets is directly tied to that of the government currency
backing it, e.g. 1 DUSD = 1 USD. As the value of the government currency fluctuates
against other assets, so will the value of the DC Asset representing said currency.”
Decentralized Capital - Government Currencies on the Ethereum Blockchain,
available at https://www.decentralizedcapital.com/#!/faq (last visited Jul. 11,
2017).Ex. “Chain Core is enterprise software that enables institutions to issue and
transfer financial assets on permissioned blockchain networks. The assets on Chain
blockchain networks are not new cryptocurrencies but are rather issued assets like
currencies, securities, derivatives, gift cards, and loyalty points. ” What is Chain
Core?, Chain, https://chain.com/faq/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017). Ex. “the assets on a
blockchain are controlled directly by the owners of those assets through the use of
secure, cryptographic keys.” Explore the Blockchain Potential, Blockchain Solutions,
http://www.blockchain-solutions.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
172 Ex. “This is an added security feature available to members who have Static IPs if
they choose to use it. Members who's IPs regularly change, that will be most of the
world, should not use this function as it will lock you out of your account once your
IP changes.” WE ARE COMMITTED TO YOUR SUCCESS, cryptofund,
https://www.cryptofund.org/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017). Ex. “Chain’s technology is
specifically designed for moving financial assets in permissioned, high-scale
environments that require enterprise-grade security and privacy” What is a
blockchain?, Chain, https://chain.com/faq/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
173 Ex. “ Focus is on driving innovation in fintech and blockchain technologies,
enabling businesses to take advantage of growth opportunities.” City AM featuring
NEX Exchange, We are Coinsilium, https://www.coinsilium.com/ (Jul. 11, 2017). Ex.
“ We build applications on top of the Factom™ network that can be used as a public
utility. These applications leverage the immutability of the blockchain and the growth
of the network.” FAQ, Factom, https://www.factom.com/about/faqs (last visited Jul.
11, 2017)
174 Ex. “we continually strive to innovate, to make banking easier, more practical and
better adapted to the needs of all our customers.” Our Response to a Changing
World, Bank BNP Paribas | The bank for a changing world,
https://group.bnpparibas/en/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017); Ex. “invests in the best
entrepreneurs who are fostering innovation in the Blockchain economy.”
Homepage, Blockchain Capital, http://blockchain.capital/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017);
Ex. “ Our mission is to act as the catalyst for widespread blockchain adoption and
innovation.” About | Pantera Capital - Blockchain Investment Firm, Pantera Capital,
https://panteracapital.com/about/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
Algorithmic solutions and other technology used to support or enable
banking and financial services;175 (8.) Decentralized:
A market structure that consists of a network of various technical
devices that enable investors to create a marketplace without a
centralized location.176
Once the authors defined the cluster category terms in the
previous paragraph, the authors and a team of researcher assistants
examined the funds in the sample for services, goals, strategies, policies
and other accessible information to find the nine key cluster category
terms. If a fund mentioned one of these words the authors would code it
as “yes=1”, if they did not then it would be recorded as “no=0”. With a
completed list of all funds, the author combined all 1’s within the data
sheet and entered them into a bar graph to show how many funds were
using these nine terms. The bar graph in Figure 4 is a representation of
these funds as a whole to demonstrate how these funds are describing
their services.
Figure 6 shows the investment strategies implemented by private
funds.177 In the context of the purpose of the use of blockchain
technology, the data from Europe and US are overall more homogenous:
funds use of blockchain technology to gain exposure to crypto assets are
the majority in both Europe and US. Other uses of the blockchain
technology by funds in Europe and the US include securing assets and
attaining growth objectives for clients. A significant difference
highlighted by Figure 6 is the lack of consideration of smart contracting
applications in European funds. This is consistent, however, with the
size differences between European and American private investment
175 Ex. “ Financial Technology has evolved to the stage where it could help overhaul
and reshape traditional industry structures and operating models.” Blockchain: What
you need to know, Northern Trust | Wealth Management, Asset Management & Asset
Servicing, https://www.northerntrust.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017); Ex. “Financial
Technology start-up companies continue to alter the industry norm.” The blockchain
revolution in trade finance, Barclays, available at
https://www.barclayscorporate.com/insight-and-research/trading-and-
exporting/blockchain-revolution-in-trade-finance.html (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
176 Ex. “connects all members of the supply chain to a decentralized network and
allows them a direct exchange of documents.” Blockchain for the people, Waves
Platform | Blockchain for the people, https://wavesplatform.com/ (last visited Jul.11,
2017); Ex. “By having decentralized storage and execution one can mitigate some of
today's real world inefficiencies such as custody, counter-party and settlement. Melon
creates a true alternative to traditional asset management.” About
Melonport, Melonport, https://melonport.com/ (last visited Jul. 11, 2017); Ex.
"Blockchains are clunky databases, so why would you want to use one? Traditional
systems have inherent flaws that make them easy targets for corruption of data. A
Factom™ system gives a single version of the truth through a Decentralized Network
of Authority. Once everyone can agree on a single version of the truth, then the truly
game-changing applications can be built." - Why Decentralized?, Factom,
https://www.factom.com/about (last visited Jul. 11, 2017).
177 A minority of funds implements more than one investment strategy. This explains
why the dataset for this graph is equal to 74.
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

U.S. vs. E.U. - BLOCKCHAIN APPLICATIONS IN PRIVATE
INVESTMENT FUNDS
funds that use blockchain technology. The data seems to suggest that
the larger European private fund advisers implement more conservative
investment strategies and use the technology predominantly to invest in-
and secure crypto assets. Whereas American fund advisers appear to
more frequently use the smart contracting features of the technology to
build more advanced and innovative crypto businesses and business
structures via blockchain technology. This may imply that American
private investment funds will have a better opportunity to launch future
disruptive implementations of blockchain technology, while at the same
time they may experience a higher rate of failure, due to a greater
exposure to technological risks.
VI. Discussion
The data analysis in this article suggests that the market for
private investment funds who invest in- and utilize blockchain
technology appears to be near equally divided between the US and the
EU with Russia and China playing a significant role. We interpret parts
of the data as suggesting that larger private investment fund advisers in
Europe may be more willing to make the required investments into
blockchain infrastructure whereas in the US the legacy systems utilized
by larger private investment fund advisers create barriers to entry for
larger private investment fund advisers to invest in and utilize
blockchain technology. On the other hand, the data also seems to
suggest that the larger European fund advisers use the technology
predominantly to invest in- and secure crypto assets whereas American
fund advisers appear to use the smart contracting features of the
technology more frequently to build more advanced crypto businesses
and business structures via blockchain technology. While the overall
proportion of strategies of private investment funds that utilize modern
technologies, including blockchain technology, is still small, as the
private investment fund industry’s use of blockchain technology grows
and accelerates, the innovation benefits for private investment funds and
their clients promise lasting change for the industry.
Private investment funds’ bank disintermediation through the
implementation of blockchain technology will depend on their ability to
find scale opportunities. Future bank disintermediation via private
investment funds also depends on the funds’ ability to participate in the
technological integration of blockchain systems with other technologies
such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, and big data.
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3002908

