BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY FOR GOOD
BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY FOR GOOD
Wulf A. Kaal*
Forthcoming in: University of St. Thomas Law Journal
Abstract
The evolution of blockchain technology as a foundational
and transformational technology helps solve critical societal
problems. Blockchain technology enables sustainability focused
blockchain initiatives to achieve their social and public welfare
objectives. Using a dataset of sustainability focused blockchain
initiatives, blockchain startups, and established businesses, the
article evaluates the core transformational features of blockchain
technology and their impact on humanity.
Key Words: Sustainability, Environment, Social Good, Social
Justice, Society, Social Causes, Assets, Blockchain, Startup,
Decentralized Commerce, Reputation Verification, Emerging
Technology, Crypto Economics, Token Models, Incentive Design,
Tokens, Equity, Distributed Ledger Technology, Blockchain
Technology, Artificial Intelligence, Robotics, Machine Learning,
Big Data,
JEL Categories: K20, K23, K32, L43, L5, O31, O3
* Professor of Law, University of St. Thomas School of Law (Minneapolis,
USA). The author is grateful for outstanding research assistance from Thomas
Berg and Hayley Howe.
0
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

Table of Contents
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................. 2
II. BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD .................................................................... 6
1. Transcending Socialism and Capitalism ........................................ 7
2. Microdemocracy ......................................................................... 12
3. Leapfrogging .............................................................................. 16
III. DATA .......................................................................................... 17
1. Use Cases ................................................................................... 18
a) Healthcare ........................................................................................ 18
b) Agriculture ....................................................................................... 19
c) Energy ............................................................................................. 21
d) Government ..................................................................................... 21
e) Environmental .................................................................................. 22
f) Charitable Donations ........................................................................ 24
g) Finance ............................................................................................ 24
h) Law ................................................................................................. 25
IV. CONCLUSION ............................................................................... 27
1
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
I. Introduction
The evolution of blockchain technology as a foundational
and transformational technology helps solve critical societal
problems. Blockchain technology enables sustainability focused
initiatives to achieve their social and public welfare objectives
through autonomous and anonymous uncoordinated collective
action for the greater good. While centralized common good
coordination of human behavior risks undermining individual
effort, blockchain technology’s autonomous and anonymous
decentralized network coordination of individual human action can
help overcome the threat to individualism and its welfare enhancing
effects.
Blockchain is a foundational and transformational
technology that has the potential to fundamentally improve societal
outcomes. Such technologically driven benefits have not been
possible in legacy systems.1 On a very rudimentary level,
Blockchain’s public interface is made up of a mere string of
1 William Mougayar, The Blockchain Is the New Google, TC (May 11, 2016)
https://techcrunch.com/2016/05/11/the-blockchain-is-the-new-google/;
MICHAEL CROSBY, NACHIAPPAN, PRADHAN PATTANAYAK, SANJEEV VERMA &
VIGNESH KALYANARAMAN, BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY BEYOND BITCOIN 3
(2015), http://scet.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/BlockchainPaper.pdf;
COGNIZANT, MARKETFORCE & PEGASYSTEMS, THE FUTURE OF RETAIL
FINANCIAL SERVICEs 6, 28-30 (2016),
https://www.pega.com/sites/pega.com/files/docs/2016/Jan/the-future-of-retail-
financial-services-study.pdf; John Naughton, Is Blockchain the Most Important
IT Invention of Our Age? THE GUARDIAN (Jan. 24, 2016, 4:00 EST),
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/24/blockchain-bitcoin-
technology-most-important-tech-invention-of-our-age-sir-mark-walport; Kyle
Torpey, Why the Bitcoin Blockchain Is the Biggest Thing Since the Internet,
NASDAQ (Apr. 19, 2016, 9:32:27 AM EST), http://www.nasdaq.com/article/why-
the-bitcoin-blockchain-is-the-biggest-thing-since-the-internet-cm608228; Carrie
Kirby, Andreessen at Coin Summit: Bitcoin Today Is the Internet in 1994,
COINDESK (Mar. 25, 2014, 20:21 GMT), http://www.coindesk.com/marc-
andreessen-balaji-srinivasan-discuss-bitcoin/; Dinis Guarda, Over 50 Bitcoin and
Blockchain Thoughts and Quotes You Need to Read, TRADERSDNA (July 4, 2016),
http://www.tradersdna.com/bitcoin-and-blockchain/over-50-bitcoin-and-
blockchain-thoughts-and-quotes-you-need-to-read/; Rich Daly, Blockchain:
Wall Street’s Most Game-Changing Technology Advance Since the Internet,
FORBES (July 11, 2016, 6:00 PM),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/richdaly/2016/07/11/blockchain-wall-streets-
most-game-changing-technology-advance-since-the-internet/#33987a154d87.
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

timestamped, immutable, and shared data. The peer-to-peer
interactions and transactions in a decentralized network, where all
participants are equal and verification and validation of each
transaction is provided by all parties in the network through the
blockchain technology, provide near unlimited opportunities and
applications.2 The technology incentivizes direct transactions,
including compensation, between the creator and consumer,
eliminating the need for intermediation.3
Blockchain technology has been defined in many different
ways, and no truly uniform definition seems to exist. Some refer to
it as a giant worldwide, distributed, immutable “google
spreadsheet” for transactions.4 Others define blockchain by
focusing on its central elements, e.g., it is a transaction ledger,
electronic, decentralized, immutable, and provides cryptographic
verification, among several other elements.5
2 For instance, in the financial world, a global consensus record of information
and transactions creates the much-needed transparency and, at the same time,
opens global access to finance, including in areas of the world where the banking
system — in contrast to a mobile telephone network — is not readily available.
See, e.g., Michele Chandler, Mobile Banking Takes Off in Nigeria, STANFORD
GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS (Jan. 24, 2012),
https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/insights/mobile-banking-takes-nigeria; Cade
Metz, Why Bitcoin Will Thrive First in the Developing World, WIRED (Feb. 2,
2016, 8:00 AM), https://www.wired.com/2016/02/why-bitcoin-will-thrive-first-
in-the-developing-world/ (noting that in Nigeria, for example, banking
transactions are readily executed over mobile phones because no infrastructure
exists for consumer banking. Donations and aid to third world countries can
finally be provided without the interference of suboptimal bureaucratic
organizations that don’t allocate the aid as intended by the donor.).
3 Rene Bader & Thorsten Deckers, How Does Blockchain Work? Transactions
Without an Intermediary, ISBUZZNEWS (May 6, 2017),
http://www.informationsecuritybuzz.com/articles/blockchain-work-
transactions-without-intermediary/; Jill Richmond, How Blockchain Is
Transforming the Creative Industry, NASDAQ (Apr. 26, 2017, 8:25:46 PM EDT),
http://www.nasdaq.com/article/how-blockchain-is-transforming-the-creative-
industry-cm780005.
4 Craig Leppan, Who Is Blockchain Going to Affect the Most, OVATIONS (July
29, 2015), http://www.ovationsgroup.com/blockchain/; Jonathan Shieber, Colu
Aims to Bring Blockchain Technology Everywhere, TC (Jan. 27, 2015),
https://techcrunch.com/2015/01/27/colu-aims-to-bring-blockchain-technology-
everywhere/;
5 See, e.g., DELOITTE, BLOCKCHAIN ENIGMA. PARADOX. OPPORTUNITY 4–7
(2016),
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
Blockchain technology’s features enable its transformative
capabilities. Through its formal immutable guarantees, improved
data ownership, transparency, network integrity, and data privacy,
blockchain technology facilitates unprecedented trust that helps to
optimize business and society. The decentralized, fully-distributed
nature of the blockchain makes it practically impossible to reverse,
alter, or erase information on the blockchain and makes it
immutable.6 The technology lowers costs in orders of magnitude
and enables a substantial increase in efficiency. Power is exercised
by way of blockchain’s consensus protocol. The consensus protocol
enables the control of data by multiple networked parties. It
facilitates a system of checks and balances that prohibits any vested
interest and control of the system.
Because of the core features of blockchain technology,
blockchain-based business models are ideally positioned to
contribute to and enhance social good and sustainability in society.
Blockchain technology and business models enabled by blockchain
technology have the capacity to solve many existing problems
afflicting society and undermining societal improvements. The
enhanced trust provided by the technology enables business models
that especially focus on business and societal functions that depend
on trust, morality, and ethics. For example, several startups are
examining the ability of blockchain technology to facilitate quasi -
governmental functions, such as a voting record, birth registry,
default currency, among many other quasi-governmental functions.
Other examples include health care record keeping and transfers.
Social good and sustainable societal functions of blockchain
technology are associated with the societal changes that are enabled
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/Innovation/delo
itte-uk-blockchain-full-report.pdf. ALAN MORRISON, BLOCKCHAIN AND SMART
CONTRACT AUTOMATION: BLOCKCHAINS DEFINED, PWC (2016),
http://www.pwc.com/us/en/technology-forecast/2016/blockchain/pwc-smart-
contract-automation-definition.pdf; Alistair Dabbs, What Is Blockchain, and
Why Is It Growing in Popularity?, ARSTECHNICA (Nov. 6, 2016, 8:00 AM),
https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2016/11/what-is-blockchain/;
Lee Grant, Blockchain – Definition, Origin, and History, TECHBULLION (Sept.
6, 2016), http://www.techbullion.com/blockchain-definition-origin-history;
6 See, e.g., Brakeville & Perepa, supra note 19; Antony Lewis, A Gentle
Introduction to Immutability of Blockchains, BITS ON BLOCKS (Feb. 29, 2016),
https://bitsonblocks.net/2016/02/29/a-gentle-introduction-to-immutability-of-
blockchains/.
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

by the technology. As the technology increasingly fulfills business
and societal functions, society may increasingly emerge with social
good and sustainable elements that derive from less ownership,
more value and goal focused work, less rent seeking behavior, more
connectivity, more freedom of choice, fewer hierarchies, fewer
geographical limitations, and less consumerism. The overall effect
of decentralized technology-based solutions will likely involve a
higher overall trust throughout society as negative effects of
untrustworthy centralized intermediations are increasingly replaced
with the trusted guarantees of decentralized technologies.
The technology’s fraud protection features provide another
prominent example of its social good and sustainability functions.
Blockchain technology’s decentralized network connectivity via
the Internet enables protection against fraud.7 Transparency is a key
feature to protect against fraud. Blockchain’s network connectivity
allows multiple copies of the blockchain to be visible and available
to all participants across the distributed network.8 The distributed
consensus model, individual network nodes verify and validate
chain transactions before the execution of the transactions, makes it
extremely rare for a fraudulent transaction to be recorded in the
blockchain.9 The consensus algorithm allows node verification of
transactions without compromising the privacy of the parties.
Consensus algorithms are, therefore, arguably safer than a
traditional model that requires third-party intermediary validation
of transactions.10
7 See, e.g., Brakeville & Perepa, supra note [__]. For an in-depth, nuanced
discussion of this point, see PETER VAN VALKENBURGH, OPEN MATTERS: WHY
PERMISSIONLESS BLOCKCHAINS ARE ESSENTIAL TO THE FUTURE OF THE
INTERNET 3–4, 23–26 (2016), https://coincenter.org/files/2016-
12/openmattersv1-1.pdf..
8 See, e.g., D’Aliessi, supra note 17.
9 See, e.g., Razvan Peteanu, Fraud Detection in the World of Bitcoin, BITCOIN
MAG. (Mar. 26, 2014, 5:50 AM EST),
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/fraud-detection-world-bitcoin-
1395827419/; Francois Janinotto, The Blockchain Explained to Web Developers,
Part 1: The Theory, MARMELAB BLOG (Apr. 28, 2016),
https://marmelab.com/blog/2016/04/28/blockchain-for-web-developers-the-
theory.html;
10 For a discussion of privacy on the blockchain, see Valkenburgh, supra note 20,
at 33–40. For an overview of various consensus mechanisms see SIGRID SEIBOLD
& GEORGE SAMMAN, CONSENSUS: IMMUTABLE AGREEMENT FOR THE INTERNET
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
Several industry-wide aggregator events hope to help
proliferate blockchain for good initiatives. For example, a
collaborative cross-industry Blockchain for Good Hackathon was
held in fall 2017 in Dublin.11 More recently, Maxonrow organized
a hackathon was held in fall 2020 with an eye toward blockchain
solutions for COVID-19.12 In summer 2020, the European
Innovation Council awarded 5 million euros to six blockchain
initiatives within its “Blockchains for Social Good” program for :
WordProof13 (Netherlands), PPP (Britain), GMeRitS (Finland),
UnBlocked Cash Project OXBBU (Ireland), CKH2020 (France),
and PROSUME (Italy).14 WordProof proves authenticity and makes
information verifiable for consumers of news.15
This article provides an overview of blockchain for good
projects in the 2020s. The author created a proprietary dataset of
blockchain for good projects and presents key findings.
II. Blockchain for Good
Blockchain for good projects come from a wide variety of
backgrounds and differ often strongly in the expectations and
intentions of their members. Yet, the uniting force for all these
projects is the desire to use emerging technology to create a better
world.
Core constituents of blockchain for good projects include social
activists, socially conscious people, the poor, indigenous people,
cultural creatives, climate change and environmental activists, the
OF VALUE (2016),
https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/07/kpmg-blockchain-
consensus-mechanism-channel-islands.pdf; Valkenburgh, supra note 20, at 15-
40.
11 Entertainment Close-up, Accenture and Hyperledger to Host ‘Blockchain for
Good Hackathon’ in Dublin,, Close-Up Media, Inc. (Sep. 29, 2017).
12 hackathon.maxonrow.com
13 wordproof.io
14 Helen Partz, European Innovation Council Awards $5M to Six Blockchain
Projects, CoinTelegraph (Jul. 1, 2020).
15 NGI, WordProof (Dec. 20, 2019).
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

unbanked, the open source movement, the open value movement,
permaculture, volunteer and non-profit communities.16
An estimated 200 million cultural creative individuals exist around
the world, concentrated in the US, Europe, Japan and Taiwan.17
Cultural creative individuals are defined by a set of values, their
lifestyle and worldview. Cultural creatives often follow a lifestyle
of health and sustainability (LOHAS). They feel all humans are
members of one planet, and are concerned about the environment
and social-economic justice. More than 3 billion people around the
world are concerned about global climate change, with the highest
concern coming from the regions of Latin America and Africa.18
According to the United Nations there are an estimated 370 million
indigenous peoples worldwide.19 They are concerned about Mother
Earth and her well being, the protection of the waters and the land
for future generations. Indigenous people are very spiritually
attached to the earth, and most of them still live on their native land.
Indigenous people are often semi-autonomous; this means most of
them can write their own laws.
The poor and the unbanked include an estimated 2 billion people
around the world who do not have a savings or checking account in
a traditional banking institution and conduct financial transactions
outside the mainstream banking system.20 One in four (28.3%) or
34.9 million households out of the total 123.2 million households in
the United States are unbanked.21 The poor and the unbanked use
alternative currencies such as bitcoin, non-bank money orders,
check cashing, prepaid debit cards, and payday loans.
1. Transcending Socialism and Capitalism
16 World Bank Report, April 2015; Forbes Magazine, Halah Touryalai, Sept 17,
2012
17 CITE
18 CITE
19 CITE
20 CITE
21 CITE
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
Blockchain for good projects are often conscious of the need to
create new solutions that are not afflicted with existing notions of
politics that go back to underlying principles of capitalism and
socialism. The tension between socialist principles for the
organization of society and capitalistic principles for the
organization of society has undermined societal goals for the
betterment of humanity for centuries. In the 20th and 21st centuries,
human society and economic systems have revolved around and
evolved from political and economic doctrines that seek to organize
society effectively and allocate resources efficiently for the
betterment of humanity. Society is organized around the
dichotomies between capitalism and socialism and has formed
power structures and political hierarchies to serve their respective
underlying ideologies.
Differences between socialism and capitalism manifest themselves
in almost all metrics of societal organization. Very few societies are
exclusively run based on either capitalistic or socialistic doctrine.
Rather, policy in a given society is an amalgamation of capitalistic
ideas and socialistic ideas. The degree of capitalistic ideas versus
socialistic ideas in a given society materialize through its adherence
to basic metrics. Such metrics may include notions of ownership,
equality, the role of government, markets, prices, efficiency, taxes,
and healthcare, among many others.
Common differentiators between socialism and capitalism can help
create the consensus for change that may be enabled by emerging
decentralized technologies. Where capitalism sees ownership as
assets that are owned by private individuals and firms, socialism
suggests assets should be owned by co-operatives and by the
government. A core difference between socialism and capitalism
revolves around efficiency. Whereas capitalism suggest that market
incentives encourage firms to cut costs and increase efficiency of
operations, socialism is less focused on notions of efficiency as
government owned firms have fewer incentives to increase
efficiencies that create economies of scale. Where capitalism sees
equality created by markets and income determined by market
forces, socialism holds that private income should be redistributed
by a strong government to ensure equality of its citizens. Similarly,
taxes in capitalism are limited to limit government spending,
whereas socialist systems typically have high progressive taxes
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

combined with higher spending on public services. Prices in
capitalism are determined by market supply and demand, whereas
prices are subject to governmental price controls in socialism.
Blockchain for good projects often realize that the long-lasting
debate on benefits and detriments of capitalism and socialism is
largely pointless. Capitalism has advantages through a dynamic
economy and strong incentives for innovation and economic
growth. By contrast, socialism has significant strengths in the
context of the promotion of equality and its attempts to overcome
market failure. Negative outcomes of capitalism and socialism are
equally bountiful. Capitalism can lead to significant inequities,
inequality, as well as monopolies, and other market failures.
Similarly, socialism has significant incentive design issues, where
hard work is not rewarded effectively and external cost are largely
ignored. More socialist systems are afflicted with significant
inefficiencies of state-run industries.
Blockchain for good projects often believe in decentralization as the
antidote to overcome the problems created by socialism and
capitalism. Decentralization via blockchain technology transcends
notions of socialism and capitalism. Decentraliszation posits that
centralized coordination of societal and economic activity, as
instituted and instantiated in capitalistic or socialistic doctrine,
should be held to a minimum in order to free the human potential
and improve society.
Blockchain technology enables a form of technology-enhanced
individualism that builds on and reforms society’s existing
infrastructure. Where the dichotomies between capitalism and
socialism focus on ownership as assets that are owned either private
individuals and firms (capitalism) or by co-operatives and by the
government (socialism), decentralism calls the concept of
ownership into question and focuses on the largest possible utility
of assets for human kind.
Decentralization via blockchain technology has the potential to
create an alternative societal order. Where the dichotomies between
capitalism and socialism focus on efficiency, that is whether market
incentives encourage firms to cut costs and increase efficiency of
operations (capitalism) or the government owned firms have fewer
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
incentives to increase efficiencies that create economies of scale
(socialism), decentralism creates efficiency not in linear forms but
via higher levels of connectivity. Where the dichotomies between
capitalism and socialism see equality created by markets and
income determined by market forces (capitalism) or holds that
private income should be redistributed by a strong government to
ensure equality of its citizens (socialism), decentralism creates
higher levels of equality in society through the preservation of
diversity of content, diversity of data sources, and enhanced node
connectivity. Where the dichotomies between capitalism and
socialism debate equitable redistribution by either curtailing taxes
to limit government spending and economic growth (capitalism) or
by increasing progressive taxes combined with higher spending on
public services (socialism), decentralism’s redistribution is based
on ownership rights in persons’ individuality-derived data that
creates economic value.
Decentralism focuses on growth through network effects not
through private rent seeking or government intervention in markets.
Because decentralism builds on and reforms society’s existing tax-
based infrastructure, calls the traditional concept of ownership into
question, and focuses on the largest possible utility of assets,
taxability of traditional assets and income is less relevant. Where
capitalism is focused on economies of scale, maximum production,
and economic growth, socialism is often seen as the antithesis with
more focus on long-term sustainable economic solutions through
planning economies. By contrast, decentralism is less concerned
with economic growth through per unit cost reduction, economies
of scale, and the associated negative externalities, but rather is
focused on connectivity and growth through network effects. As
such, negative externalities are minimized without centralized
planning.
The transcendental nature of blockchain technology manifests itself
through the instantiation of its core features in different systems and
contexts. For example, technology is largely limited to the control
of corporations (capitalism) or governments (socialism). By
contrast, in decentralism, technologies are mostly shared to create
best solutions for humanity and not owned and controlled. The open
source movement, in its purest form, provides an example of the
power and use of technology for the greatest utility of humanity.
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

Similarly, the arts and science are subject of the limitations of
monetary quantification in both capitalism and socialism. By
contrast, because the arts and science help proliferate unique
skillsets and diversity of opinions, decentralism values the arts and
sciences disproportionately. Human rights, access to resources,
sustainability, freedom, peace and prosperity are also protected at
different levels in capitalistic or socialistic societies. The highest
protection of human rights, access to resources, sustainability,
freedom, peace and prosperity around the globe is universally
emphasized in the technology-enhanced individualism of
decentralism as each ensures the foundations of human input into
decentralized systems.
As compared with capitalism and socialism, the role of trust is
different in decentralism. In capitalism, trust in the system is
generated through trusted intermediaries and checks and balances.
Trust in socialism is created through believe in the infallibility of
government. By contrast, decentralism posits that trust in the system
should not be controlled by corruptible human constructs and
institutions that are controlled by a limited number of fallible and
corruptible humans. Rather, trust in decentralism is based on
technology-enhanced individualism. Trust depends on technology-
facilitated collective human action and as such belongs to the
majority, incorruptible by fallible individual action. Trust in
capitalism and socialism is partially created by legal guarantees and
by a judicial system that enforces such legal guarantees. Legally
created trust is often limited as it can be arbitrary because it is only
indirectly democratically legitimized, inflexible, untimely, resistant
to change, with fallible human-centric decision processes, and
human speed. Trust in decentralized legal solutions can be more
democratically legitimized through microdemocratic,
individualistic yet technology-centric autonomous decision
processes, coded guarantees, and machine speed.
Decentralism allows society to reevaluate its forms of organization
and production. Decentralized systems use elements of profit
generation and redistribution in a way that in effect combines
capitalistic and socialistic ideas. Decentralism allows for the
organization of society in economic structures that generate profits
while at the same time redistributing resources. For example,
decentralized autonomous organizations combine elements of
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
socialistic cooperatives with the meritocracy and incentivization of
capitalism. Another example is provided by the ability to sell one’s
personal (e.g. social media etc. consumption) data, preferences,
opinions etc. in decentralized systems, including in real time. Such
assets, e.g. one’s data, preferences, opinions etc. can only limitedly
be commercialized in existing centralized structures. In
decentralized structures such assets can be tokenized, valued, and
mobilized. Similarly, tokenized hard assets, such as real-estate, can
be tokenized and sold in unprecedented fractional forms. The ability
to control one’s data and fractionalized (hard) assets enables new
forms of consumption for consumers. In the early 2020, several
startups were developing a barter system in which services, such as
free car rides etc., become available in return for disclosure of
consumers’ data and personal preferences etc.
2. Microdemocracy
Microdemocratic principles inherent in blockchain technology can
help overcome the existing challenges of representative
democracies. Microdemocratic applications embrace technology to
eliminate many of the problems faced by representative
democracies. For example, internet-based technology and proper
technological incentivization can increased lacking voter
participation that undermines representative democracies.
Experimentation with electronic forms of voting allows new forms
of allocating votes to prioritize societal issues for each voter.
Quadratic voting,22 for example, allows a first glimpse of what may
be possible in microdemocratic voting structures. Each voter in a
given microdemocratic voting scenario may be allocated a
maximum number of votes. Such votes may be allocated by priority
to any issues the respective voter wants to engage with.
The more important a given societal issue is for a given voter, the
more votes the voter will allocate to the issue. For example, as more
and more people become aware of the climate crisis faced by
22 Wyle and Eric Posner, Radical Markets. Cite to Quadratic voting literature by
Vitalik Buterin.
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

humanity, they will increasingly allocate their votes on issues that
reflect their increasing awareness. Change thus becomes tangible as
people allocate their votes prioritized by their then existing
preferences and awareness. Similarly, if a voter is particularly
affected by the erection of a nuclear power plant in their backyard,
they are able to allocate all of their votes for or against such
erection.
This microdemocratic approach allows the voter to exercise their
maximum voting power to the issue most relevant to such voter.
Moreover, part of the power of this microdemocratic approach
derives from the higher levels of knowledge a given voter has on a
particular issue that is evidenced by the voters’ proportional
allocation of votes on such issue. It is less likely that voters will
allocate number one priority on issues they know relatively little
about. Voting outcomes and their application and relevance to a
given constituent are thus presumably improved.
Microdemocratic processes may not negate vote delegation in
representative democratic processes. Knowing the significance and
power of their total amount of available votes, constituents may
decide to delegate voting power to a selected representative. This
delegation is likely much more based on the actual knowledge of
such representative and her respective skillsets, ethical record, and
trustworthiness. For example, a voter may recognize that she has
insufficient knowledge about an issue that is very close to her heart.
This may trigger her desire to make the acquaintance of a potential
representative with a higher level of knowledge about the particular
issue she cares about. She will typically select an individual with
high levels of knowledge and who has a reputation in the
community for being highly trustworthy and knowledgeable. Yet,
the delegation of voting power inevitably allows corruptive element
back into the system as certain representatives may wish to bribe or
purchase votes to provide them with more power in the system.
Delegation of votes necessitates a policing system to avoid the
corruptive elements.
Microdemocracies would need to address the problem of the
tragedy of the commons. The concept of the tragedy of the
commons describes the downsides of a microdemocratic shared-
resource system for the common good of the society. In
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
microdemocratic systems, individual voters act independent of the
totality of voters according to their self-interest. Acting for their
own self-interest may be contrary to the common good of all voters.
Without controls, some self-interested voters may be depleting or
spoiling resources they share with the rest of society, such as the
environment, public goods, among others. Similarly, majority rule
may mean discrimination of the minority. A majority that is
unaffected by a rule they instantiate may have a discriminatory
impact on a minority that is disproportionately affected by the
change in the rules.
A key advantage of a microdemocracy based on blockchain
technology is the speed of change it can initiate. In the early 2020s,
representative democracies were largely slow and inflexible
because of their constitutional and institutional infrastructure and
their respective legal systems. Change typically depended on the
election of a new government after, typically, around 4 years at the
earliest. By contrast, microdemocratic voting would be a more
immediate feedback system between voters and their
representatives. Because technology enables the incorruptible
counting and tallying of votes instantaneously, voting can be more
dynamic and incremental and political will is exercised more
directly.
Decentralized technologies provide inherent microdemocratic
features that can help instantiate microdemocratic principles and
processes in society. Decentralized technologies can help bring
more direct microdemocratic representation to society.
Decentralized technology enables smaller scale democratic
decisions at unprecedented scale. In the early 21st century, internet
platform businesses and social media companies inaugurated new
forms of voting. The “Like” button, while deeply-flawed in its
incentive design and voting-related outcomes, inaugurated a new
form of voting on social outcomes and, at the same time, trained the
voting public to engage more directly with voting related outcomes.
Decentralized technologies create extensions of these forms of more
direct democratic votes. Unlike their centralized predecessors,
decentralized technologies, for the first time in history, enable
improved incentive designs that help overcome the insufficiencies
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

in voting outcomes of representative democracies.23 As voting
pools in decentralized systems increase, deepen, and proliferate,
they can become supplemental voting systems that help overcome
the lack of legitimacy and improve representative democracies. Of
course, such upgrades to existing representative democracies may
require constitutional or democratic support which is dubious at
best.
Decentralized technology can improve voting technology in
representative democracies. Voting technologies in existing
representative democracies were woefully outdated at the beginning
of the 21st century. Since Gore vs. Bush,24 which necessitated
reexamination of punch holes in paper voting cards, existing voting
systems with analog or paper technology have been proven
suboptimal. But the problems with existing voting systems do not
stop with technology. Redistricting, that is, changing the
demarcation of a given voting district to adjust to voter preferences
therein and change overall voting outcomes, and other basic
democratic voting-related issues show that voting and the
democratic institutions built to facilitate basic tenets of
representative democracies have been under attack and require
updates. Decentralized technologies have technological features
that can provide solutions. But, such solutions also require political
will. For example, voting on a public blockchain that overcomes the
trilemma of blockchains (decentralization, scaling, security) may
become a core application of the technology. Yet, governments in
the existing representative democracies may not wish to surrender
control over the voting process and may prefer to use private
blockchains to facilitate voting outcomes.
Centralized technology companies increasingly act like
governments. For example, Microsoft announced in January 2020
that it would open a representation to the United Nations.25 In 2020,
executives of the top technology companies were added to list of
attendees at the annual security conference, a position that was
previously reserved exclusively for presidents, prime ministers, and
23 For more details see Chapter [___].
24 CITE
25 Marietje Schaake, Technology Companies want to act like governments,
Financial Times, Opinion, February 21, 2020, page 9.
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
politicians. Regulating the increasing power of centralized
technology conglomerates only addresses part of the issues. Even if
fully regulated, centralized technology conglomerates still have the
power to set standards and norms for emerging technologies that
government cannot effectively trace. Microdemocratic decision
making helps set such standards outside of the control metrics
imposed by the centralized technology conglomerates.
3. Leapfrogging
Developing and emerging countries have a significant opportunity
to benefit from blockchain technology.26 When the blockchain-
based smart contracting infrastructure evolved, the resulting
disintermediation in the next fifteen years allows consumers to
connect at no transaction costs with each other peer to peer. The
blockchain enabled pee-to-peer economy will help open previously
underdeveloped or non-existing industries, new technologies, and a
vast amount of new employment opportunities.
Unlike developed countries, third world- and developing countries
will likely be enabled by blockchain technology to leapfrog several
stages of development, otherwise necessitated in existing legacy
systems. Fintech startups leverage technology to improve the
quality of, and access to, financial services for individuals in
markets that have traditionally been excluded from such markets.
For instance, mobile phones have revolutionized the banking
industry in Nigeria, leapfrogging several stages of development.27
Blockchain-based services are a part of this evolution that benefits
developing countries. Other examples include startups working on
blockchain systems that maintain land title records data. Such
blockchain title data can serve as collateral for accessing credit or
verifying identities which is often a challenging and prohibitive
requirement for accessing both financial and non-financial services.
26 Vermeulen – Medium – on UN Charter initiatives for Blockchain tech in
developing countries
27 Smartphone penetration is expanding quickly around the world with 6.8 billion
users expected by 2022. A number of startups are leveraging that reach and
providing access to credit in markets in Africa, South America and South-East
Asia. CITE
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

III. Data
The author worked with a group of research assistants to compile a
list of (n=33) blockchain for good projects. The researchers
reviewed the whitepapers of each projects and categorized
identified projects into objective buckets, among other criteria. This
allows an objective evaluation in graph format.
Figure 1: The rise and fall of blockchain for good projects. N=33.
Figure 1 shows that blockchain for good projects proliferated
between 2013-17 and peaked in 2017. Many of the projects in the
dataset did not launch successfully or perished over time. For
example, GiftCoin, a charitable donation tracking project, was
launched in 2017 with an initial coin offering expected to launch in
March 2018,28 which shut down in June 2018.29 Regulatory
concerns and lack of confidence in the market were cited as reasons
for postponing the sale.30
28 GiftCoin, Whitepaper,
https://www.promisegiving.com/GiftCoin_Whitepaper.pdf
29 Civil Society News, Crypto donation platform halts token sale and returns
funds to investors, CivilSociety (Jun. 19, 2018),
https://www.civilsociety.co.uk/news/crypto-donation-platform-postpones-
token-sale-and-returns-funds-to-investors.html
30 Civil Society News, supra
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
1. Use Cases
Figure 2: Project by Industry.
Figure 2 shows the breakdown of projects in the dataset by
blockchain for good industry. The data suggest that the
overwhelming majority of projects in the blockchain for good
context are in healthcare, exchanges and in the environmental
protection sectors, as well as charities.
a) Healthcare
Blockchain technology can play a major role in the transformation
of healthcare. The technology allows patients to exercise more
control over their personal data in the existing healthcare ecosystem
by increasing the security, privacy, and inter-operability of
healthcare related data.31
31 The Potential for Blockchain to Transform Electronic Health Records, A
vexing problem facing health care systems throughout the world is how to share
more medical data with more…
hbr.org
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

Blockhchain technology allows the securing of disparate data
sources in healthcare. Using digital signatures on blockchain-based
data could allow access to multiple healthcare providers and
improve the coordination of patient care significantly. Most people
have health records maintained by multiple uncoordinated
healthcare organizations including doctors, specialists, and
insurance providers. Blockchain technology allows secure shared
access to health-related records amongst necessary parties. This can
significantly lower fraud in healthcare payments, aid in addressing
coverage gaps, and eliminate misinformation provided to healthcare
providers.
Examples for blockchain for good projects in the healthcare
industry include medical companies that track and distribute inter-
and intra-hospital resources via blockchain technology. Some
healthcare-oriented projects are for internal use, such as facilitating
distributed ledger transactions between teams.32 Other projects
operate on a larger scale, such as to link organ donors to patient
matches33 or a genetic data platform to aid in research and drug
development.34 Supply chain compliance,35 tracking and
monitoring of food and vaccines36 can also be accomplished
through blockchain. The CDC and IBM have discussed projects
using blockchain to track public health issues and collect electronic
health records.37
b) Agriculture
Blockchain technology can help ascertain the integrity of clean food
for consumers. Consumers increasingly favor genetically
unmodified organic food from local and sustainable sources. Yet, it
is usually difficult to verify the integrity of products. A distributed
32 Medcoin
33 Kidner
34 Geneyx
35 Mediledger
36 Statwig
37 CITE https://www.cdc.gov/ddphss/chiic/index.html;
https://www.cdc.gov/ddphss/chiic/index.html
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
ledger that takes account of the origin of foods around the world
and their production methods could provide the much-needed
transparency, especially if integrated into the existing supply chain.
The ledger could not only benefit consumers of food to trace the
food origin but also can help ensure the fair and sustainable
treatment of producers of foods around the globe. The technology
could also ensure pricing controls, supply chain integration, and
accelerated payment systems.38
Some blockchain for good projects claim to use what they label
Natural Capital Accounting (NCA). NCA is the process of
calculating the total stocks and flows of natural resources and
services in a given ecosystem or region. Using the NCAS, wealth
can be generated by planting more trees, cleaning up the waters,
protecting the animals, repopulating the oceans and reversing
climate change. The NCAS makes the invisible values of nature
become visible. The blockchain is perfect for tracking and trading
of these values.
The vast majority of farmers in developing countries are considered
“smallholder farmers” - farmers with holdings below their region’s
farm size.39 Blockchain solutions can ease the process of accessing
loans40 and reduce middlemen.41 Blockchain could also facilitate a
smart transportation system.42 In conjunction with the United
38 From Bitcoin to Agriculture: How Can Farmers Benefit from Blockchain? –
AgFunderNews, Editor's Note: Emma Weston is co-founder and CEO of Full
Profile, where she leads blockchain strategy and development…
agfundernews.com
39 Jean-Marc Boussard, What is a smallholder? , The impact of structural
adjustment on smallholders (1992), Food and agriculture organization of the
United Nations FAO Economic and Social Development Paper 103
http://www.fao.org/3/T0211E03.htm#Chapter%201%20:%20What%20is%20a
%20smallholder
40 Matthew Quayson, et al., Technology for social good foundations: a
perspective from the smallholder farmer in sustainable supply chains, IEEE
Transactions on Engineering Management (2002) at 2.
41 Quayson, supra at 3. See also Gordon Conway, Food for All in Africa, Digital
Farmers (219-50) Cornell University Press.
42 Mirko Zichini, et al., A distributed ledger based infrastructure for smart
transportation system and social good, IEEE 17th Annual Consumer
Communications & Networking Conference (2020).
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

Nations 2030 Sustainable Development Goals43, in October 2018,
Blockchain Charity Foundation contributed $1 million USD to the
UN Development Programm.44 The United Nations implemented a
pilot program in order to allocate food and other resources
efficiently in refugee camps through the use of tokens in Syria.45
c) Energy
Blockchain technology has the potential to offer a reliable and low-
cost technology solution that enables the clean and sustainable
energy supply for consumers.46 Sustainable clean energy has
become a focus for many consumers around the world. Distributed
energy resources are experiencing significant growth. Given the
existing shortcomings of the energy infrastructure, governments,
utility companies, and other stakeholders require new sustainable
and innovative approaches to better regulate and manage the
electricity grid. Rooftop solar systems, electric vehicles, and
sustainable ride sharing are among the examples of sustainability
startups that hope to facilitate a more sustainable energy policy.
d) Government
Government entities and quasi-governmental bodies including
NGOS can benefit from considering blockchain technology as a
solution to many existing coordination problems. Many
government departments work largely without sufficient integration
with other governmental bodies. A result of this separation is their
inability to share information across agencies. This creates red tape,
delay and negatively impacts the ability to provide effective
43 United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Sustainable
Development, The 17 Goals sdgs.un.org/goals
44 Economics Week, Blockchain Charity Foundation and UNDP Announce
Partnership to Explore Blockchain for Social Good, NewsRX LLC (Oct. 12,
2018).
45 https://www.wfp.org/news/blockchain-against-hunger-harnessing-
technology-support-syrian-refugees
46 The Energy Web Foundation: Bringing Blockchain Technology to the Grid,
Blockchain technology-the technology underpinning the B itcoin virtual
currency-is being discussed as one of the most…
www.renewableenergyworld.com
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
government services. Linking necessary data between
governmental departments via blockchain could eradicate potential
government corruption and increase the efficiency of the public
sector.
Governments and quasi-governmental bodies have started to
embrace blockchain technology to serve social and environmental
causes. For instance, to address the challenges of the so-called
informal economy, in 2013, a Commission of a special agency of
the United Nations, UNCITRAL,47 put together a working group
aimed at reducing the obstacles and barriers encountered by smaller
businesses that are often forced into the so-called informal
economy.48 Moreover, the UN already recognized the benefits of
blockchain technology. A UN initiative to use the “Ethereum
blockchain” network and eye-scanning hardware to distribute
coupons to thousands of people in refugee camps in Jordan.49 Other
examples include the inability of indigenous tribes to make a living
without resource extraction from their natural inheritance.
e) Environmental
Blockchain for good projects that are in the environmental
sector often involve allow carbon footprint tracking,50 incentivize
producing energy from renewable resources,51 facilitate open-
47 CITE
48 With high barriers to entry into existing market infrastructure, startup and
smaller businesses, especially in developing countries, are increasingly forces
into the informal economy with the associated disadvantages, including unsafe
working conditions, as well the inability to obtain sufficient or any level of
credit and a lack of protection in the event of default. CITE - UNCITRAL agreed
that consideration of the issues relating to the creation of an enabling regulatory
environment for smaller businesses should focus on: (1) simplifying business
registration and operation; (2) offering an efficient system for resolving
disputes; (3) providing access to financial services; and (4) ensuring better
access to credit.
49 A Branch of the UN Just Launched Its First Large-Scale Ethereum Test –
CoinDesk, Starting today, the United Nations (UN) will begin distributing funds
to thousands of people in Jordan as part of a…
www.coindesk.com
50 Ecochain; Innogy/DESIGNETZ/Innovation Hub/Free Electrons/GidX
51 Solarcoin
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

source energy52 and ethical recycling.53 For example, Innogy, a
German energy company, uses blockchain to allocate solar, wind,
and other clean energy across power grids.54 Ultimately, blockchain
regulation of resource use could yield energy decentralization.
The 2001 U.S. Western Energy Crisis55 and the 2003
Northeast Blackout56 were a testament to the vulnerabilities of
centrally-managed energy management. Coordinating larger
numbers of decentralized resources from a central point of control
is slow, inefficient, and resource-intensive.57 Blockchain
technology can help coordinate these resources and enable a
decentralized, resilient, and stable electrical grid58 that is also
secure.59 The creation, tracking, and trading of carbon compliance
instruments such as Renewable Energy Certificates60 can be
facilitated via utility billing systems based on blockchain
technology.61 For example, the UNDP is using blockchain
technology to track cashmere herds and limit production from
overgrazed areas, in order to address soil erosion in Asia.62 One of
the EIC competition winners, Prosume, allows peer-to-peer energy
trading in order to promote new energy community models in order
to support sustainable energy production, distribution, and
storage.63
52 Grid Singularity
53 Plastic Bank
54 Innogy
55 See, e.g. https://www.nwcouncil.org/reports/columbia-river-
history/energycrisis and https://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/electric/general-
information/addressing-2000-2001-western-energy-crisis
56 See, e.g. https://www.energy.gov/oe/articles/10-years-after-2003-northeast-
blackout and https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/2003-blackout-five-
years-later/
57 Claire Henly, et al., Energizing the future with blockchain, 39 Energy L.J.
197, 208 (2018) (citing footnote 72).
58 Henly, supra at 208
59 Henly, supra at 214-15
60 Henly, supra at 209
61 see Henly, supra at 210-11.
62 Rina Chandran, Tech helps cashmere herders, hazelnut farmers fight soil
erosion in Asia, Thomson Reuters (Aug. 4, 2020).
63 NGI, Prosume (Dec. 20, 2019),
ngi.eu/blockchainsforsocialgood/2019/12/20/prosume
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
f) Charitable Donations
Projects in the charity category facilitate a wide range of
tracking and supervisory functions. The transparency blockchain
technology offers can help address the public’s diminishing trust in
traditional charities.64 Blockchain-based charitable giving
solutions65 allow for charitable donations to be anonymous or
named, tracked to their destination, and free of any administrative
cost or fee. Projects that utilize tracking and supervisory functions
of blockchain technology include donation tracking66 through the
use of a platform-specific token.67 AidCoin facilitates charitable
donations using cryptocurrency, but not requiring users to purchase
proprietary tokens in order to do so—instead permitting donation in
twenty-eight cryptocurrencies.68 Other projects use blockchain and
digital asset technology to facilitate anonymous charitable
donations in large quantity, which gave over 5,000 bitcoins to 60
charities69 (equivalent to about 86 million USD in December
2017).70 Directed Cash allows individual donors to specify
conditions attached to their donation that are then efficiently paired
with interested recipients or charities using distributed consensus to
achieve both donation transparency and donor anonymity.71
g) Finance
Blockchain technology is very advantageous in financial
inclusion efforts. These products typically fall under the
64 See Muhammad Shoaib Farooq, et al., A framework to make charity
collection transparent and audible using blockchain technology, 83 Computers
and Electrical Engineering (2020).
65 Binance Charity, Bitgive, the Pineapple Fund, and the Social Tech Trust
66 BitGive/GiveTrack
67 GiftCoin
68 AidCoin
69 See, e.g., Michael J. Coren, A bitcoin millionaire’s fortune will fund
psychedelic research, a cure for aging, and clean water, Quartz (Dec. 20,
2017), https://qz.com/1160997/a-bitcoin-millionaire-is-giving-away-a-fortune-
to-psychedelic-research-curing-aging-and-clean-water/.
70 The Pineapple Fund
71 Shweta Jain and Rahul Simha, Blockchain for the common good: a digital
currency for citizen philanthropy and social entrepreneurship, IEEE (2018).
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

FinTech4Good category.72 Feeless money exchange and transfer
capabilities to “the unbanked” can be impactful in regions where
fiat currency, banks, and political situations are unstable.73
Some examples that help illustrate how the unbanked may
benefit from blockchain technology include the following: The
Social Tech Trust was founded in 2008 and provides investment
and support needed for social tech ventures to grow and scale their
impact.74 Alice, a blockchain platform founded in 2016 that brings
together donors, investors and nonprofits to deliver transparent
social impact, is one project partially funded by the Social Tech
Trust.75 Oradian was founded in 2012 to address growth challenges
by creating tools for financial inclusion that are accessible to all
financial institutions.76 Oradian’s founders are experts who spent
years observing growth obstacles in cooperatives, microfinance
institutions, microfinance banks, rural banks, and Saccos.
h) Law
Blockchain for good projects also cover largely legal
considerations. For example, blockchain technology can improve
public access to legal solutions. Traditionally, the cost of legal
services often create an unfair advantage in the law based on wealth.
In an effort to address such inequities, some law firms have
partnered with blockchain technology firms to create smart contract
programs which are designed to facilitate streamlined Alternative
Dispute Resolution negotiations without the need to interact in
person.77
Another example of the application of the technology in the
legal context includes intellectual property. Intellectual property
ownership can be tracked using blockchain technology. For
72 See e.g. Sharon Burns, Nonprofit blockchain: inspiring applications in the
FinTech4Good market, The Non-profit Times (Jun. 2019).
73 Oradian, Alice, Humaniq, Disberse, and Stellar
74 Social Tech Trust, About, https://socialtechtrust.org/about/ (last visited Aug.
21, 2020).
75 Social Tech Trust, Alice: A Case Study (May 2019),
https://socialtechtrust.org/our-portfolio/case-studies/alice-a-case-study/.
76 Oradian, https://oradian.com/
77 See (see Alice’s partnership with Ashurst law firm)
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

BLOCKCHAIN FOR GOOD
example, in response to the problem of the ease of copying and
distributing digital intellectual property, Ascribe78 proposed a new
method to track and control digital file ownership. Blockchain-
based music and art databases help facilitate direct artist-consumer
transactions in order to funnel proceeds directly to artists.79
Problems with basic human rights in certain countries can
be addressed with blockchain technology. Blockchain can enable
tracking of stateless individuals whose basic human rights are
challenged in multiple contexts. Bitnation80 created such a database
and provides such individuals documentation of identity for
international use, including certificates of birth and marriage,
refugee status, and emergency ID. This scheme calls itself the
world’s first “Decentralized Borderless Voluntary Nation.”
International regulations on trade bring increased due
diligence risks. For example, U.S. companies purchasing gold, tin,
tantalum, and tungsten are required to disclose whether the purchase
funded armed groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo.81
Supply chain mapping is not only costly and time-intensive but is
not entirely effective.82 Complete tracking is particularly difficult in
the mineral industry because of the prevalence of smelting during
processing.83 Minespider84 uses blockchain technology to track and
verify natural resources by allowing companies at the production
stage to create digital blockchain-based certifications based on the
amount of material produced.85
Land and property management can be ameliorated by
blockchain technology. 65% of the world’s land holding fell under
traditional tenure systems in 2018.86 In a system like Ghana’s,
which is bifurcated between modern formal versus traditional
informal land governance, transactions are lost, data is inconsistent,
78 See https://www.ascribe.io/
79 See, e.g. https://resonate.is/
80 Bitnation
81 See Anna Laesser, Blockchain4Good: How new startups around the world
are pioneering land registries, supply chains and the solar industry, 1 Delphi
38, 41 (2018) discussing Dodd-Frank Act Sec. 1502
82 See Laesser at 41 discussion of supply chain mapping.
83 Laesser at 41
84 Minespider
85 Laesser at 42
86 Rights and Resources Initiative, Who owns the world’s land? (Sep. 2015)
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

and the land market ecosystem has been described as asymmetric.87
Ben Ben builds upon existing government land registry
infrastructure and uses blockchain technology to create a self-
sustainable land registry running parallel to the official land registry
by facilitating end-to-end housing finance transactions between
property developers, commercial lenders, property buyers and land
sector agencies.88
IV. Conclusion
This article has demonstrated the potential of blockchain for good
projects and their inherent ability to facilitate common good
objectives. The long-term benefit of blockchain technology for the
common good of humanity depends on decentralized infrastructure
development. As more decentralized infrastructure emerges,
blockchain for good projects can directly benefit from such
infrastructure. Such infrastructure enables blockchain technology to
release and fulfill its true potential for humanity.
87 Laesser at 39 (citing Maquli Y. Ahorlumegah, National mortgage and
housing initiative to provide Gc1bn housing fund, Ghana News Online (Jul. 4,
2018)).
88 Laesser, supra at 39-40.
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709041

