ARTICLE
Extraterritorial Application of US
Securities Law: Will the US Become
the Default Jurisdiction for European
Securities Litigation?
WULF A. KAAL, MISSISSIPPI COLLEGE SCHOOL OF LAW* AND RICHARD W. PAINTER, UNIVERSITY OF MINNESOTA LAW SCHOOL
1. INTRODUCTION in particular.7 One commentator, Margaret Sachs, thoroughly
researched the legislative history of the 1933 Securities Act and
US law applies to non-US residents and non-US entities in a the 1934 Securities Exchange Act and found substantial evidence
variety of contexts. The Alien Tort Claims ActI allows US courts that Congress intended these laws not to reach transactions in
to hear some human rights cases brought by foreign citizens for foreign markets, but instead only transactions within the United
conduct committed outside the United States.2 Similarly, US States.8 Commentators outside the United States have also
courts have held that the US Bankruptcy Code does not require expressed dissatisfaction with the 'long arm' of US law, and in
the presence of assets in the United States for ancillary insolvency particular US securities law.9
proceedings against a foreign debtor.3 In securities regulation, The US Supreme Court, in a case to be decided later this year,
the SEC has continuously expanded its extraterritorial reach Morrison v. NationalA ustralia Bank,to may curtail the jurisdiction
with strong support from the judiciary, most notably the Second of US courts in cases where foreign plaintiffs sue foreign defen-
Circuit Court of Appeals.4 dants over securities purchased in foreign securities markets. At
Many US commentators are concerned about this trend. John the same time, Congress could move in the opposite direction.
Bellinger, the former Legal Advisor to the US Department of Section 7216 of the Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection
State, for example, has urged that the United States not become Act of 2009,11 not yet enacted but pending in Congress, could
a'world court' for apartheid abuses in South Africa or similar expand the extraterritorial jurisdiction of US courts in these
claims.5 Securities law commentators have criticized the extrater- cases. This could have lasting implications for European jurisdic-
ritorial reach of US laws6and the potential impact on Europe tions, companies, attorneys, investors, and financial institutions.
E-mail: Kaal0mc.edu.
1 28 U.S.C. s. 1350 (stating in part: 'The district court shall have original jurisdiction of any civil action by an alien for a tort only, committed in violation of the law of nations
or a treaty of the United States').
2 The Supreme Court in Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain (03-339) 542 U.S. 692 (2004), 331 F.3d 604, tried to curtail the types of cases that are actionable under the Alien Tort Claims
Act holding that new causes of action based on violations of international law norms'should be undertaken, if at all, with great caution' Id., 287.
3 See Haarhuisv . Kunnan Enters, Ltd., 177 F.3d 1007, 1012 (D.C. Cir. 1999), holding that s. 304 of the US Bankruptcy Code does not expressly require the presence of assets in
the United States for ancillary insolvency proceedings against a foreign debtor.
4 Roberta S. Karmel,'The Second Circuit's Role in Expanding the SEC's Jurisdiction Abroad, St. Johns Law Review 65 (1991): 743.
5 See John B. Bellinger Ill,'The U.S. Can't Be the World's Court - New York Isn't the Right Venue to Sue for Apartheid Abuses', WSJ, 27 May 2009, <http://online.wsj.com/articlel
SBl 24338378610356591 .html>.
6 See, for example, Stephen J. Choi & Linda J. Silberman,'Transnational Litigation and Global Securities Class Action Lawsuits', Wisconsin Law Review 2009 (2009): 465; Stephen
Choi & Andrew Guzman,'Portable Reciprocity: Rethinking the International Reach of Securities Regulation, Southern CaliforniaL aw Review 71 (1998): 903, 927 ('with such
expansive jurisdiction, even if a judgment is granted, foreign legal action may be required to enforce it').
7 See, for example, Andrew Longstreth,'Coming to America, American Lawyer, November 2006, 11/2006 Am. Law. S53 (Westlaw); Mary Jacoby,'For the Tort Bar, a New Client
Base: European Investors, Wall Street Journal, 2 September 2005, Al.
8 Margaret V. Sachs,'The International Reach of Rule 10b-5: The Myth of Congressional Silence, Columbia Journalo f TransnationalL aw 28 (1990): 677, 700-701.
9 See, for example, Oliver Kn6fel,'Whistleblowing und Sarbanes-Oxley - Kein Extraterritorialer Arbeitnehmerschutz?', Recht der InternationalenW irtschaft 7 (2007): 493, 494;
Sascha Lotze, US-amerikanisches Kapitalmarkrsrechtu nd Internet (2002), 78; Peter Versteegen, K61ner Kommentar zum WpOG (2003), s. 24 WpOG, 34; Rainer Sulmann,
Geibel/Sifllmann Kommentar zum WpOG, s. 24 WpOG, 8; Jan von Hein, Grundfragen des europAischen Obernahmekollisionsrechts, 5 AG 213, 224 (2001); Timo Holzborn,
Ausschluss auslindischer Aktion5re nach s. 24 WpCG -'Die Disclaimer Problematik', 2 BKR 67, 73-76 (2002); Oliver Klepsch, Steinmeyer/Hlger, Kommentar zum WpOG,
s. 24 WpOG, 10.
10 547 F.3d 167, 172 (2d Cir. 2008).
11 The Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2009 (Introduced in House), H.R. 4173; 111th Congress, s.7216. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the Antifraud provi-
sions of the Federal Securities Laws.
Kaal, Wulf A. & Richard W. Painter.'Extraterritorial Application of US Securities Law: Will the US Become the Default Jurisdiction for European Securities Litigation?'
European Company Law 7, no. 3 (2010): 90-97.
@ 2010 Kluwer Law International BV, The Netherlands

2. MORRISON V. NATIONAL AUSTRALIA BANK only in connection with securities purchased or sold within the
United States. First, issuers and investors should know in advance
US courts have analysed the question of whether section 10(b)
whether US law applies to their transactions, whether foreign law
of the 1934 Securities and Exchange Act12 and SEC Rule 10b-5
applies, or both. Issuing and investing in securities should not be
can be applied to foreign litigants in securities fraud cases as a
a guessing game, and the 'conduct and effect' test of the Second
question of subject matter jurisdiction. The most frequently used
Circuit was too unpredictable. A clear rule focused on the location
approach is the Second Circuit's so-called 'conduct and effects'
of the transaction would be more predictable. Second, allow-
test, which looks at whether conduct contributing to the violation
ing foreign plaintiffs to sue foreign defendants in US courts over
took place in the United States or whether the conduct had an
securities purchased and sold in foreign countries would turn the
effect on US investors.13 US courts have avoided a bright line rule
United States into the global arbiter of securities fraud allegations,
to determine which cases can be litigated in US courts and which
causing significant damage to US foreign relations and under-
cannot. As a result, US courts apply the conduct and effects test
mining international cooperation in combating securities fraud.
inconsistently. 14 This inconsistency is especially problematic in
Third, imposing the US system of securities litigation on the rest
the context of 'foreign cubed' litigation,15 that is securities lawsuit
of the world could lead to suboptimal outcomes given the sharp
involving a foreign plaintiff suing a foreign issuer in a US court
differences between the United States and most other countries
for violations of US securities laws based on securities transac-
in substantive securities law, procedural law, and the way class
tions in a foreign country.16
actions are administered. Many countries, the professors pointed
The Supreme Court in Morrison v. NationalA ustralia Bank17
out, choose to combat securities fraud with government enforce-
may bring some clarity to this issue. Morrison and other Austra-
ment rather than private litigation, and the United States should
lian plaintiffs had purchased shares of National Australia Bank
respect the right of other countries to regulate their own markets.
(NAB) in Australian securities markets. They sued NAB in federal
Morrison and the other plaintiffs, on the other hand, have
court in New York under section 10(b) alleging that NAB had
urged the Court to retain the conduct and effects test and also to
misrepresented to shareholders its exposure to bad mortgages in
find that the Second Circuit applied the test too narrowly in their
a Florida subsidiary and that conduct in Florida caused this mis-
case when it refused to find jurisdiction. Most of the conduct that
representation because Florida employees had altered financial
perpetrated the fraud, plaintiffs claim, occurred in Florida, and
statements. The Second Circuit applied the conduct and effect test
the United States has a legitimate interest in protecting foreign
and found an insufficient connection between the alleged securi- investors from fraud perpetrated within its borders, regardless
ties fraud and the United States to allow the suit to go forward, of where the security is purchased or sold. Congress in 1933 and
in part because the alleged misrepresentations to investors had 1934, plaintiffs urged, also had intended the federal securities laws
been made in Australia rather than in Florida. Plaintiffs asked the
to apply in these situations. Plaintiffs cited very little legislative
Supreme Court to review the case and the Supreme Court agreed history to support this argument. Plaintiffs instead argued that
to do so. Briefs were filed in early 2010 and oral argument was the expansive language of section 10(b) itself required the Court
heard in March 2010.
to apply section 10(b) to cases involving fraudulent conduct
A group of twenty-one US law professors, including the
within the United States that affects markets elsewhere.
authors of this article, submitted an amicus brief to the Supreme
Court in Morrison asking the Court to ensure that private par-
3. CONGRESS MAY SUBJECT NON-US SECURITIES
ties outside the United States not be allowed to use US courts
TRANSACTIONS TO US SECURITIES LITIGATION
to litigate claims that exceed the subject matter that Congress
intended to regulate in section 10(b). The professors discussed Regardless of the Supreme Court's ruling in Morrison v. NAB,
the detailed legislative history compiled by Professor Margaret Congress could overrule the holding in that case because this is
Sachs, who joined the amicus brief, and concluded that Congress a matter of statutory construction. The Court is being asked to
had intended the federal securities laws only to cover purchases interpret an Act of Congress, and Congress may respond to an
and sales of securities within the United States. The professors interpretation it does not like by amending the Act.
also observed that as a matter of policy, it was better to have a In the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis, there is reason to
bright line rule that would allow civil suits under section 10(b) worry that Congress may do that. US investment banks including
12 15 U.S.C. s. 78j (2006).
13 For a thorough discussion of case law, see Erez Reuveni,'Extraterritoriality as Standing: A Standing Theory of the Extraterritorial Application of the Securities Laws, UCDavis
Law Review 43 (2010): 66, Part I, <http://ssrn.com/abstract=1496049>.
14 Ibid.
15 See Hannah L. Buxhaum,'Multinational Class Actions under Federal Securities Law: Managing Jurisdictional Conflict, Columbia Journalo f TransnationalL aw 14 (2007): 17.
16 See Morrison v. National Australia Bank Ltd., 547 F.3d 167, 172 (2d Cir. 2008). The Supreme Court granted certiorari in Morrison v. NationalA ustralia Bank Ltd., No. 08-1191,
2009 WL 4111014 (U.S. 30 Nov. 2009).
17 547 F.3d 167,172 (2d Cir. 2008), No. 08-1191, 2009 WL 4111014 (U.S. 30 Nov. 2009).
EUROPEACNOM PANY LAW - 91 - JUNE 2010, VOLUME 7, ISSU3E

Goldman Sachs have been accused of designing deceptive deriva- H.R. 5173.18 Section 7216 of H.R. 517319 (section 7216) would
tive securities transactions that were used by the government explicitly provide for extraterritorial jurisdiction with respect
of Greece to conceal the fact that its debt levels exceed those to anti-fraud provisions in the federal securities laws if there
allowed by the European Union (EU). The difficulties of Greece is'conduct within the United States that constitutes signifi-
and the role of US investment banks illustrates the impact that cant steps in furtherance of the violation, even if the securities
conduct within the United States can have on world markets. In transaction occurs outside the United States and involves only
the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, a court-appointed bankruptcy foreign investors'. This 'significant steps' standard is probably
examiner alleged that Lehman hid debt on its balance sheet at the broader - and covers a wider range of defendants - than the
end of each quarter by selling assets - including mortgage backed Second Circuit's 'conduct and effect' test, which arguably covers
securities - for a few days to banks in London that were promised only conduct in the United States that directly causes the misrep-
that Lehman would repurchase (repo) the same assets for cash resentation to foreign investors.20 The proposed language covers
at the beginning of the next quarter, with the same arrangement the Securities Act of 1933 - section 22,21 the Securities Exchange
being repeated at the end of the following quarter. US law firms Act of 1934 - section 27,22 and the Investment Advisers Act of
refused to opine that the transaction was a true sale of the assets 1940 - section 214.23 As of this publishing, it is unclear whether
under US law, but a UK law firm did opine that the transaction Congress will enact this language and whether the final version
was a true sale under UK law if the reported value of the assets of the bill will include section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange
was 105% of the sale price. The transaction, called 'Repo 105' Act of 1934, the provision under which private plaintiffs sued
was consummated in London, and Lehman's auditors opined in Morrison v. NAB and in most other similar cases. If this bill is
that Lehman could book the transaction as a sale on its financial enacted and if it does include section 10(b), Professor John Cof-
statements in its US securities filings. This incident underscored fee has correctly observed that'the United States could become
the affect that conduct in one country can have on markets a magnet for global class actions'.24 US lawyers may benefit
elsewhere. from 'securities litigation tourism' just as lawyers in the United
Congress could respond to these and other allegations of Kingdom have benefited from 'libel tourism' in which aggrieved
transnational securities fraud by passing legislation that provides parties from around the world take advantage of expansive UK
financial and other support for international cooperation among libel laws to bring suits in the United Kingdom claiming that their
regulatory authorities in combating securities fraud and regulat- reputations were damaged in the United Kingdom. It is unlikely,
ing securities markets. Congress also, however, could support however, that turning any single country into a global litigation
unilateral US action as Congress has done in its approach to com- mill for a particular subject matter - whether securities law or
bating terrorism and some other global problems. Congress thus libel law - enhances that country's role in the world economy.
could expand the jurisdictional reach of the SEC as well as the
subject matter jurisdiction of US courts over private suits involv-
4. THE IMPACT OF TRANSNATIONAL SECURITIES LITIGATION
ing purchase and sale of securities on foreign markets.
Congress is currently considering a bill introduced last year, In the past decade, US courts have faced a rise in foreign cubed
The Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2009, cases.25In 2008, foreign cubed cases exceeded any previous year
18 H.R. 4173; 11Ith Congress - Introduced in House of Representatives.
19 § 7216, Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the Antifraud Provisions of the Federal Securities Laws:
(a) Under the Securities Act of 1933 - Section 22 of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. 77v(a)) [Under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 - Section 27 of the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78aa) (...and] Under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 - Section 214 of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-14) is
amended by adding at the end the following new subsection:
(c) Extraterritorial Jurisdiction - The jurisdiction of the district courts of the United States and the United States courts of any Territory described under subsection (a)
includes violations of Section 17(a), and all suits in equity and actions at law under that section, involving -
(1) conduct within the United States that constitutes significant steps in furtherance of the violation, even if the securities transaction occurs outside the United States and
involves only foreign investors; or
(2) conduct occurring outside the United States that has a foreseeable substantial effect within the United States.
20 See Bersch v. Drexel Firestone, Inc., 519 F.2d 974, 993 (2d Cir. 1975). Bersch found that s. 10(b) applied when'all the elements of a defendant's conduct necessary to establish a
violation' occurred in the United States. Subsequent case law applying the conduct and effects test has reached a broader range of conduct, but it is unclear how broad.
21 15 U.S.C. 77v(a).
22 15 U.S.C. 78aa.
23 15 U.S.C. 80b-14.
24 John C. Coffee, Jr.,'High Court and Congress on a Collision Course, Nat'l L.J. (18 Jan. 2010).
25 See Cornerstone Research, 'Securities Class Action Filings 2009: Mid-year Assessment', <http://securities.cornerstone.com/pdfs/2009_Mid-Year Assessment.pdf>, 2009, 7.
See also Cornerstone Research, 'Securities Class Action Filings 2009: Mid-year Assessment News Release, <http://securities.cornerstone.com/pdfs/2009_Mid-YearRelease.
pdf>, 2009, I (elaborating that: 'This report introduces a new metric, the Class Action Filing-Foreign Index (CAF-F Index-), that measures the number of securities class
action filings in U.S. federal courts against defendant corporations headquartered outside the United States. Federal securities class action lawsuits against issuers with non-
U.S. headquarters ("foreign firms") have been rising for more than a decade and reached 31 filings (13.8 percent of total filings) in 2008, with an average of 18 foreign firms
(9.4 percent of total filings) sued in each year since 1997. Thus far in 2009, 18 lawsuits have been filed against foreign firms, representing 20.7 percent of the total').
JUNE 2010, VOLUM7E, ISSUE3 . 92 -- EUROPEACNOM PANY LAW

and the trend is continuing.26 One reason for this development of securities class actions, a tendency towards higher damages and
could be a lack of securities class actions in European jurisdic- settlement amounts, little or no exposure of plaintiffs to liabil-
tions.27 This void increases incentives for forum shopping by ity for defendants' legal fees even if the defendants prevail, and
plaintiffs' lawyers. Forum shopping by foreign plaintiffs may the possibility of including some aspects of derivative actions in
also result from a tendency in the United States towards higher their claims. If section 7216 becomes law and allows the extrater-
judgments and settlements.28 The effect will be magnified if US ritorial application of US anti-fraud provisions, this law could
courts can be persuaded to intervene in shareholder derivative further incentivize forum shopping by plaintiffs' attorneys. Over
suit claims and other disputes under the laws of an issuer's state time, this may lead to assimilation of US law into the regulatory
or country of incorporation. approaches of European jurisdictions that feel compelled to adopt
For European jurisdictions, the extraterritorial application of portions of US law in order to discourage forum shopping.29
US law can create confusion, legal uncertainty, and difficulties Assimilation of US legal rules in turn may result in increased
regulating private parties that engage in regulatory arbitrage by transaction costs for the changing jurisdiction.
taking their litigation to the United States when it is convenient Some aspects of US law could be quite troubling for EU juris-
for them to do so. European jurisdictions may also feel compelled dictions. In securities class actions, for example, US law allows
to change their laws to conform with US law. European plain- plaintiffs to proceed on the basis of the 'fraud on the market
tiffs' attorneys may be able to utilize US legal remedies and other theory' rather than requiring plaintiffs to prove actual reliance on
benefits of the US legal system, but they are exposed to competi- misleading statements.30 This approach has been rejected in most
tion with US attorneys who have an advantage in conducting other countries.31 The application of section 10(b) of the 1934
US litigation. Act32 and Rule 10b-5 in conjunction with the fraud on the market
Finally, there is the enormous impact of transnational securi- theory substantially increases the potential liability of issuers and
ties litigation on non-US companies. Increasing the extraterrito- can lead to questionable results.33 EU jurisdictions may not want
rial application of US law could mean that European companies this rule to apply to their securities markets. Under section 7216,
will be exposed to US law even if they are not cross-listed compa- however, US law could apply to EU companies that are accused of
nies that choose to sell American Depository Receipts (ADRs) conduct violating US securities laws, even if they have no securi-
or other securities in the United States. Under an expansive US ties traded in the United States.
litigation regime, many companies will be covered by US securi- Class actions involving all or mostly foreign plaintiffs also give
ties law if they have any operations in the United States where rise to unique difficulties with class certification under Federal
conduct causing securities fraud elsewhere could be alleged. Rule of Civil Procedure 23 and identification of a lead plaintiff
This could have lasting implications for the financial report- as required by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
ing, corporate governance, and business operations of European 1995 (PSLRA). 34 The SEC itself has suggested that securities class
companies. actions present unique considerations and that'a more jurisdic-
Combined, all of these trends could have long-term effects on tionally restrictive standard may be warranted in the class action
international relations, diplomacy, and cross-border investment. context'.35 Section 7216 by contrast suggests that Congress could
Some of these effects are discussed in more detail below. be on the verge of ignoring this advice and establishing a more
expansive class action regime instead.
4.1. European Jurisdictions and European Companies Many countries have made different decisions than the United
Forum shopping by lawyers - both US lawyers and European States about trade-offs between the interests of plaintiffs and the
lawyers - representing European plaintiffs is incentivized by interests of defendants in class action litigation. These decisions
attractive features of the US legal system such as the availability shape both substantive law and procedural law. Some countries
26 See Stanford Law School Securities Class Action Clearinghouse & Cornerstone Research, 'Securities Class Action Filings 2009: A Year in Review, <http://securities.stanford.
edu/clearinghouse-research/2009_YIR/CornerstoneResearch-Filings_2009_YIR.pdf>, 2010, I1.
27 See Buxbaum, supra n. 15, 61.
28 See Christof Aha & Jens F6derer,'Die Roche - Entscheidung des U.S. Court of Appeals', Recht der InternationalenW irtschaft 6 (2003): 450, 451.
29 See ibid., 458; Bernd Schunemann,'The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002: A German Perspective, Buffalo CriminalL aw Review 36 (2004): 35, 49; see Holzborn, supra n. 9. An exam-
ple of assimilation of legal norms is the introduction of the derivative suit in s. 148 AktG (German Corporation Act) and the German business judgment rule in s. 93 12 AktG.
Both of these provisions are modelled after the US example albeit certain elements were added. In the case of the German derivative suit, a requirement of stockownership of
at least EUR 100,000 was added to avoid frivolous suits.
30 See Basic, Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224 (1988).
31 See Buxbaum, supra n. 15, 61.
32 48 Stat. 881, 15 U.S.C. s. 78a et seq. (enacted 6 Jun. 1934).
33 Aha & Foderer, supra n. 28, 456.
34 See Stephen J.C hoi & Linda J.S ilberman,'Transnational Litigation and Global Securities Class Action Lawsuits, Wisconsin Law Review 2009 (2009): 465, 479 (discussing these
difficulties).
35 Brief of the Securities Exchange Commission as amicus curiae in Morrison v. Australia National Bank in response to the court's request, 4, n. 1, 547 F.3d 167 (2d Cir. 2008).
EUROPEACNOM PANY LAW - 93 - JUNE 2010, VOLUM7E, ISSUE3

reject class action litigation entirely because they believe that it is Increasing the extraterritorial application of US law through an
too expensive, because it encourages frivolous litigation, because expansive application by US courts of the 'conduct and effects'
it does not deter securities fraud, or for other reasons.36 Not test or Congressional enactment of section 7216, however, could
every country wants a class action litigation system or wants its mean that more European companies could be exposed to the
securities markets subject to one. It would be preferable for other anti-fraud provisions of US securities law whether or not their
nations to make this choice for themselves. Once again, section securities are traded in the United States. European companies
7216 could have the opposite effect of forcefully exporting US law could be faced with substantive legal requirements that are
on other jurisdictions, including Europe. inconsistent with the substantive laws and corporate governance
standards in their home jurisdiction.42
4.2. Overlapping Regulation More specifically, US securities law could be inconsistent with
the law in European countries on such basic questions as when
The application of the US Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 200237 to for-
issuers have a duty to disclose information to investors and what
eign companies illustrates the impact of extraterritorial applica-
information is sufficiently material that issuers must disclose it.
tion of US law. Many of the provisions of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Because of EU privacy laws, contractual arrangements, or other
do not correspond with the applicable law in Member States of
considerations, a company could possibly be prohibited from
the EU and the respective rules, regulations, and initiatives of the
EU.38 A European company, however, has some ability to avoid disclosing information in EU jurisdictions that the company is
required to disclose in the United States. EU companies that are
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act if it avoids listing its securities in the
United States. Another example of overlapping regulation39 is the cross listed in the United States have to deal with these problems
because they voluntarily subject themselves to US securities law,
investigation of United States and European companies by multi-
but US foreign cubed litigation threatens to force these problems
ple regulators from different jurisdictions for payments to foreign
government officials.40 Perhaps the most significant case to date on other EU companies as well.
is the Siemens bribery investigation involving the US Department
4.3. Legal Uncertainty
of State, the SEC, and the Public Prosecutor in Munich, Germany.
Siemens implicitly acknowledged its exposure to disparate and Overlapping regulation and inconsistent legal rules create uncer-
overlapping regulation by pleading guilty on several counts and tainty.43 Individual board members of European companies and
simultaneously settling with the US DOJ, SEC, and the Munich their attorneys will not know which legal rules apply and what
Prosecutors Office.41 effects these rules may have. They will also face uncertainty when
Currently, cross-listed companies, that is, companies that are they assess the marginal cost and marginal benefits of complying
listed on their home stock exchange as well as a foreign exchange, with the perceived dominant legal system. Not knowing which
are more likely to be exposed to conflicting legal requirements legal system is dominant can make these decisions enormously
than companies that are only listed on their home stock exchange. difficult.
36 See Samuel P. Baumgartner, 'Class Actions and Group Litigation in Switzerland, Northwestern Journalo f International Law &lB usiness 27 (2007): 301, 310-312 ('proponents
of such a [class action] device in Switzerland face considerable doctrinal, jurisprudential, cultural, and economic objections. Among them are a traditional focus on the indi-
vidual nature ofa claim; limitation of judicial power vis- -vis the legislature, thus disallowing the large-scale judicial discretion necessary to manage complex litigation; strong
emphasis on the litigants' right to be heard, which would need to be slighted in complex cases; different respective roles of judges and attorneys; lack of American-style fee
structures and entrepreneurial lawyering; and the many practical changes that would be necessary to introduce a class action device. Moreover, there is a clear preference for
legislation rather than litigation to deal with new social problems, including mass torts').
37 Pub.L. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745 (enacted 30 Jul. 2002).
38 See, for example, Schunemann, supra n. 29, 49-50; Hans-Georg Kamann & Martina Simpkins, 'Sarbanes-Oxley Act: Anlass cu verstirkter Internationaler Kooperation?, Recht
der InternationalenW irtschaft 3 (2003): 183, 184.
39 It is important to distinguish 'overlapping' from 'conflicting' regulation. Conflicting regulation could violate international law. The territorial integrity of a state is only
breached by the extraterritorial application of foreign law and results in the breach of international law if there is a specific 'true conflict' in the substantive legal norms of
the respective states. See Ulrich Stirmer, Die extraterritorialeA nwendung Amerikanischer Anlegerschutzbestimmungen - Ein Beitrag zum InternationalA ktienverkehrsrecht aus
Vdlkerrechtlicher Sicht unter Besonderer Beriicksichtigungd es Insiderrechts (Peter Lang Verlag, Europaische Hochschulschriften, Reihe II, Bd/vol. 187, 1977), 17. See also Karl
M. Meessen,'Kollisionsrecht als Bestandteil des Allgemeinen Volkerrechts: VOlkerrechtliches Minimum und Kollisionsrechtliches Optimum, in Festschriftfiir,e d. F.A. Mann,
s. 227 ff. See Hartford Fire Insurance Co. v. California,5 09 U.S. 764 (1993), opining that: 'The only substantial question in this litigation is whether "There is in fact a true
conflict between domestic and foreign law".'
40 Linda Chatman Thomsen, Dominick D. Barbieri & Mathew S. Miller,'Dealing with Multiple Regulators: Reflections on Parallel Investigations, Regulators' Differing Roles, and
Issues to Consider in Representing Organizational Clients, in PracticingL aw Institute CorporateL aw and Practice Course Handbook Series (2009), 903, 922.
41 See Statement of Offense, United States v. Siemens Aktiengesellschaft, Cr. No. 08-367-RVC (D.D.C. 18 Dec. 2008), <www.justice.gov/opaldocuments/siemens-ag-stmt-offense.
pdf>, 39; see also David Crawford & Mike Esterl, 'Siemens Pays Record Fine in Probe, Wall Street Journal, 16 Dec. 2008, B2. For background and Siemens's reactions, see
Siemens AG,'Corporate Communications - Rechtsstreitigkeiten - Geschiftsjahr 2007', <www.siemens.com/press/pool/delevents/jahrespk2007/legal-proceedings-q4-2007-
d.pdf>, November 2007.
42 Kamann & Simpkins, supra n. 38.
43 See, generally, Helmut Wagner, 'Legal Uncertainty - Is Harmonization of Law the Right Answer?, Discussion Paper No. 444, <www.fernunihagen.de/FBWIWI/forschung/
beitraegelpdf/db444.pdf>, January 2009 (discussing and defining legal uncertainty generally).
JUNE 2010, VOLUME 7, ISSUE3 -94 - EUROPEACNOM PANY LAW

Legal uncertainty generates transaction costs.44 European generously to US political campaigns. The US financial services
company boards will inevitably incur costs in minimizing infor- industry, however, also ranks among the most generous donors to
mation asymmetries generated by different legal regimes that may US political campaigns and US issuers of securities also contrib-
or may not apply to their company. Paying US lawyers for advice ute. Non-US individuals and companies, by contrast, are expressly
is one of these costs. Legal advice would include ascertaining the prohibited by US law from contributing to US political cam-
legal setting of business transactions - for example, whether there paigns.48 Non-US business interests also have a relatively weak
is sufficient conduct or effects in the United States for US securi- lobby in Washington, DC.
ties laws to apply - and advice on litigating disputes over what The balance of political power inside the United States has in
legal rules may apply. For companies that want to avoid securities the past two decades led to legislation that favours defendants
fraud allegations, there will also be the cost of compliance with over plaintiffs in securities litigation, including the PSLRA. This
two sets of legal rules. may change after the 2008 financial crisis, but perhaps it is no
The extraterritorial application of US law, if legitimized by surprise that Congress is not seriously considering repeal of
Congress in section 7216, could exacerbate legal uncertainty PSLRA, however, Congress is seriously considering section 7216.
for European companies even further than it is already under PSLRA benefits all defendants including US financial intermedi-
the conduct and effects test. As discussed above, the proposed aries, but the defendants harmed by section 7216 will almost all
statutory language in section 7216 is arguably broader than the be non-US financial intermediaries and issuers who are less able
conduct and effects test. Relative to the total number of US secu- to defend themselves in the US political system.
rities fraud and securities class action cases,'foreign cubed' cases
are now relatively rare45 - although there has been a substantial 4.5. European Lawyers
increase in foreign cubed cases in 2008.46 Thus, most European US attorneys compete with European attorneys. For instance,
companies are currently either not aware or are not concerned large New York-based US firms are often competing for the same
with potential legal risk, potential liability, or potential involve- clients with so-called magic circle firms in the United King-
ment in such suits. However, the enactment of section 7216 could dom and other large firms in mainland Europe. Recently, many
make foreign cubed cases an integral part of the legal landscape companies in Europe and the United States suffered losses in the
in the United States and hence in Europe. credit crisis and have reduced their payment of legal fees, forcing
some law firms to file for bankruptcy, to downsize significantly,
4.4. European Financial Intermediaries or to dissolve.49 For US law firms representing plaintiffs and
A large proportion of US securities fraud cases involve banks, defendants, litigation involving securities transactions outside the
brokers, and other financial intermediaries. These intermediaries United States is an attractive source of revenue.
often have the 'deep pockets' that plaintiffs' lawyers are looking Over the past decade, US plaintiffs' attorneys have expanded
for. If section 7216 extends the application of US securities fraud their client base with foreign investors and increased the scope
provisions to non-US securities transactions, European financial of US securities class actions on a global scale.50 US law firms
intermediaries could become the dominant target for plaintiff's may charge contingency fees. Plaintiffs' lawyers even if they lose a
attorneys. European financial intermediaries could also change suit are protected by the American rule, under which each party
their procedures and operations to avoid US securities fraud is responsible for paying its own attorneys' fees. European law
litigation, putting them at a competitive disadvantage with US courts are more likely to apply the'English' rule, that is, the los-
financial intermediaries that can do business in Europe without ing party pays the attorneys' fees of the prevailing party. US class
fear that European courts would subject them to suits by US actions are cost-effective for lawyers given the enormous amounts
plaintiffs over US transactions. of money involved, and European jurisdictions mostly do not
EU financial intermediaries, like EU issuers, are also at a offer securities class actions as a remedy for litigants. In addition,
competitive disadvantage in their interaction with the US politi- the tendency in the United States towards higher judgments and
cal system. Campaign contributions have a substantial impact on settlements, as well as the possibility for derivative suits,51 makes
public policy in the United States.47Plaintiffs' lawyers contribute the United States a lucrative place to litigate for plaintiffs' and
44 Ibid., 6 (elaborating that:'Legal uncertainty generates the following transaction costs: (a) costs of collecting information, (b) costs of legal disputes, (c) costs of setting incen-
tives for pushing through legal claims, and (d) other transaction costs').
45 See Stanford Law School, supra n. 26 (the increase in foreign cubed cases started in 2008).
46 See ibid.
47 See Richard W. Painter, Getting the Government America Deserves: How Ethics Reform Can Make a Difference (Oxford University Press, 2009), Ch. 11.
48 In 1974, the prohibition on political contributions and expenditures by foreign nationals was incorporated into the Federal Election Campaign Act, 2 U.S.C. 431 et seq.
49 See Larry E. Ribstein,'The Death of Big Law, University of Illinois Law & Economics Research Paper No. LE09-025, <http://ssrn.com/abstract= 1467730>, 2009.
50 See Buxbaum, supra n. 15,62.
51 Aha & Federer, supra n. 28.
EUROPEACNOM PANY LAW --- 95 - JUNE 2010, VOLUM7E, ISSUE3

defendants' lawyers. While European law firms could participate finding material information on European companies. Even if they
in securities litigation in the United States, US law firms are at find appropriate sources, the information may be incomplete.62
an enormous advantage as they will be perceived by clients to be Given the state of securities regulation in Europe, European
familiar with US substantive and procedural law as well as the investors arguably are more exposed to securities fraud than US
practical aspects of US litigation. investors. On the other hand, the financial crisis of 2008 revealed
If section 7216 is enacted, European plaintiffs and defendants a substantial amount of financial mismanagement, and fraud, by
will likely turn to the expertise of American law firms. This will US issuers and financial intermediaries. Regardless of the relative
give US lawyers additional opportunities to expand an aggressive merits of securities regulation in the United States and in Europe,
marketing campaign for legal services in Europe. The enactment European investors are most likely to benefit if Europe addresses
of section 7216 thus could further exacerbate the already difficult this issue itself. Giving EU plaintiffs greater access to US courts to
situation for European law firms. sue EU issuers and financial intermediaries for alleged violations
of US law may look attractive to EU investors in the short term,
4.6. European Investors but if the US litigation system imposes substantial costs on EU
US securities laws require issuers whose securities are sold or companies, these costs will be passed on to investors. If Congress
traded in the United States to disclose material information to enacts section 7216, EU investors will, on the whole probably, earn
investors and keep investors informed in a timely manner.52 The a lower return on their investments than they would otherwise.
SEC also requires all listed companies to file their reports on a
centralized system that is accessible by investors, called EDGAR. 4.7. International Law
In Europe, each country is responsible for its own securities If section 7216 should pass, some litigants, commentators, and
regulation and the EU has no central agency for securities regula- perhaps even national governments may argue that section 7216
tion.53 There is no centralized system like EDGAR for continu- is inconsistent with international legal rules governing extrater-
ous disclosure of pertinent information to investors. Only fairly ritorial jurisdiction. These include GATT/WTO and some of the
recently have European countries introduced mandatory and con- side agreements or Bilateral Investment Treaties. Under broader
tinuous issuer disclosure.54 Such disclosure in Europe is often self- principles of international law, the territorial integrity of a state
regulated rather than being enforced by a regulator.55 The Euro- can be breached by the extraterritorial application of foreign
pean Parliament and the European Commission have attempted to law if there is a specific conflict in the substantive legal norms of
address disparate regulation and lack of enforcement in individual the respective states.63 The extraterritorial application of US law
European Member States by adopting the Market Abuse Direc- thus raises questions under international law if 'there is in fact
tive,56 Transparency Directive,57 the Markets in Financial Instru- a true conflict between domestic and foreign law'.64 It is unclear
ments Directive,58 and the Prospectus Directive.59 Despite many if there would be a conflict between the anti-fraud provisions of
improvements,60 the directives do not mandate coherent and US securities law and its European counterparts. The scope of
comprehensive disclosure and issuers continue to make disclosures US anti-fraud provisions is broader than anti-fraud legislation in
in disparate ways. Some scholars have argued that there is a need European countries, but it may be possible to comply with both
for a European SEC.61European investors continue to struggle regimes at the same time. On the other hand, if US law requires
52 To further the goal of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of mandating disclosure on a rapid and current basis, the SEC extended the list of material events that require immediate disclo-
sure by listed companies in the United States. See SEC Votes to Adopt Additional 8-K Requirements and to Propose Amendments to Form 20-F and Fund Manager Disclosure
Requirements, SEC News Digest, I 1 Mar. 2004, <www.sec.gov/news/digest/dig031104.txt>.
53 The Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR) is an independent committee of European Union Member States' securities regulators, but it has no enforcement
powers (see <www.cesreu.orglindex.php?page=cesrinshort&mac=0&id=>).
54 Iris H-Y Chiu, 'Delegated Regulatory Administration in Mandatory Disclosure - Some Observations from EU Securities Regulation', International Lawyer 40 (2006): 737,
767.
55 Supra n. 54, 746.
56 Council Directive 2003/6, Art. 6, 2003 O.J. (L 96) 16 (EC).
57 Council Directive 2004/109, 2004 OJ. (L 390) 38 (EC).
58 Council Directive 2004/39, 2004 O.J. (L 145) 1 (EC).
59 Council Directive 2003/71, 2003 OJ. (L 345) 64 (EC).
60 Generally on improvement in the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive, see Francois P.H aas,'The Markets in Financial Instruments Directive: Banking on Market and
Supervisory Efficiency, IMF Working Papers, <http://ssrn.com/abstract=108716>, 2007, vol. 1-23.
61 See, for example, Roberta Karmel,'The Case for a European Securities Commission', Columbia Journal of Transnational Law 38 (1999): 9; Yannis Avgerinos, 'The Need and
the Rationale for a European Securities Regulator, in Financial Markets in Europe: Towards a Single Regulator, ed. Andenas & Avgerinos (2003); Gilles Thieffry, 'The Case for
a European Securities Commission', in Regulating Financial Services and Markets in the 21st Century, ed. Ferran & Goodhart (2001); Eric Pan, 'Harmonization of U.S.-EU
Securities Regulation: The Case for a European Securities Regulator, Law and Policy in International Business 34 (2003): 499.
62 Chiu, supra n. 54.
63 See Stfirmer, supra n. 39; see also Meessen, supra n. 39.
64 See Hartford Fire Insurance Co. v. California, 509 U.S. 764 (1993).
JUNE 2010, VOLUME 7, ISSUE3 -96 - EUROPEACNOM PANY LAW

disclosure of information that another country's law would
prohibit to be disclosed, whether for privacy reasons or other
reasons, there could be a true conflict of law and a credible case
that the United States is in breach of international law.
4.8. Diplomacy
If section 7216 is enacted, European jurisdictions may feel com-
pelled to change their laws to conform to US legal rules. Euro-
pean companies may feel compelled to modify their US activities.
European governments may take issue with perceived pressure by
the US legal system on their legislatures and regulators. They may
also object to their companies being subjected to US jurisdiction
in securities transactions that have no apparent US ties.
The United States does not always have a reputation for coop-
eration in foreign relations.65 European governments have voiced
concern about US attitudes towards international law.66 Section
7216 could be one more impediment to good diplomatic relations
if the United States is perceived as establishing its courts as inter-
national courts in securities matters with universal jurisdiction.
The US government could instead offer to cooperate with
the EU to prevent securities fraud. The EU might in some ways
change its law to conform with US law and the United States
might in some ways change its law to conform with EU law.
Exporting and imposing rules through extraterritorial reach,
on the other hand, could be counterproductive not only for US
diplomacy but also for international cooperation in combating
securities fraud. If national securities regulators are unable or
unwilling to cooperate with each other, there is likely to be more
fraud.
5. CONCLUSION
The decision by the Supreme Court in Morrison v. NAB as well
as the decision by Congress to perhaps enact section 7216 could
have a lasting impact on European jurisdictions, companies,
lawyers, and investors as well as on foreign trade and diplomacy.
European Boards of Directors and company lawyers should fol-
low upcoming events closely and prepare themselves for these
impending changes. They should also ask Congress to reconsider
section 7216. Finally, they should ask President Obama to live up
to his pledge to improve international cooperation by refusing to
sign such a provision into law.
65 See John R. Bolton,'Is There Really Law in InternationalA ffairs?, TransnationalL aw and ContemporaryP roblems 10, no. 1 (2000): 48; see also'Symposium Transcripts, Toward
an International Criminal Court?, Emory InternationalL aw Review 14 (2000): 159 (debating the harmful effects to foreign policy in light of American exceptionalism).
66 See Robert J. Delahunty, 'The Battle of Mars and Venus: Why Do American and European Attitudes Toward International Law Differ?, Loy. U. Chi. Int'l L. Rev. 4
(2006): 11 (2006).
EUROPEACNOM PANY LAW - 97 JJU NE 2010, VOLUUM7E, ISSUE3

